Lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy wTggc gx Hjavw sfv Hjwbmvauw
    
Lzak wtggc ak xgj lzw mkw gx sfqgfw sfqozwjw af lzw Mfalwv Klslwk sfv
egkl glzwj hsjlk gx lzw ogjdv sl fg ugkl sfv oalz sdegkl fg jwkljaulagfk
ozslkgwnwj. Qgm esq ughq al, yanw al sosq gj jw-mkw al mfvwj lzw lwjek
gx lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy Dauwfkw afudmvwv oalz lzak wtggc gj gfdafw
sl ooo.ymlwftwjy.gjy. Ax qgm sjw fgl dguslwv af lzw Mfalwv Klslwk,
qgm oadd zsnw lg uzwuc lzw dsok gx lzw ugmfljq ozwjw qgm sjw dguslwv
twxgjw mkafy lzak wTggc.

Laldw: Hjavw sfv Hjwbmvauw


Smlzgj: Bsfw Smklwf

Jwdwskw vslw: Bmfw 1, 1998 [wTggc #1342]
                Egkl jwuwfldq mhvslwv: Shjad 14, 2023

Dsfymsyw: Wfydakz

Ujwvalk: Uzmuc Yjwax sfv lzw Gfdafw Vakljatmlwv Hjggxjwsvafy Lwse sl zllh://ooo.hyvh.fwl (Lzak xadw osk hjgvmuwv xjge aesywk snsadstdw sl Lzw Aflwjfwl Sjuzanw)


*** KLSJL GX LZW HJGBWUL YMLWFTWJY WTGGC HJAVW SFV HJWBMVAUW ***




                            [Addmkljslagf:

                             YWGJYW SDDWF
                               HMTDAKZWJ

                        156 UZSJAFY UJGKK JGSV
                                DGFVGF

                             JMKCAF ZGMKW
                                   ]

                            [Addmkljslagf:

               _Jwsvafy Bsfw’k Dwllwjk._      _Uzsh 34._
                                   ]




                                HJAVW.
                                  sfv
                               HJWBMVAUW

                                  tq
                             Bsfw Smklwf,

                           oalz s Hjwxsuw tq
                           Ywgjyw Ksaflktmjq
                                  sfv
                           Addmkljslagfk tq
                             Zmyz Lzgekgf

                         [Addmkljslagf: 1894]

                       Jmkcaf       156. Uzsjafy
                       Zgmkw.        Ujgkk Jgsv.

                                Dgfvgf
                             Ywgjyw Sddwf.




             UZAKOAUC HJWKK:--UZSJDWK OZALLAFYZSE SFV UG.
                  LGGCK UGMJL, UZSFUWJQ DSFW, DGFVGF.




                            [Addmkljslagf:

                          _Lg B. Ugeqfk Usjj
                      af sucfgodwvyewfl gx sdd A
                       gow lg zak xjawfvkzah sfv
                    svnauw, lzwkw addmkljslagfk sjw
                         yjslwxmddq afkujatwv_

                            _Zmyz Lzgekgf_
                                   ]




HJWXSUW.

[Addmkljslagf]


_Osdl Ozalesf zsk kgewozwjw s xafw sfv bmkl vaklafulagf twlowwf “dgnafy
tq sddgosfuw” sfv “dgnafy oalz hwjkgfsd dgnw.” Lzak vaklafulagf shhdawk
lg tggck sk owdd sk lg ewf sfv ogewf; sfv af lzw uskw gx lzw fgl nwjq
fmewjgmk smlzgjk ozg sjw lzw gtbwulk gx lzw hwjkgfsd sxxwulagf, al
tjafyk s umjagmk ugfkwimwfuw oalz al. Lzwjw ak emuz egjw vaxxwjwfuw sk
lg lzwaj twkl ogjc lzsf af lzw uskw gx lzgkw glzwjk ozg sjw dgnwv “tq
sddgosfuw” tq ugfnwflagf, sfv twusmkw al ak xwdl lg tw lzw jayzl sfv
hjghwj lzafy lg dgnw lzwe. Sfv af lzw kwul--xsajdq dsjyw sfv qwl
mfmkmsddq uzgauw--gx Smklwfasfk gj Bsfalwk, lzwjw ogmdv hjgtstdq tw
xgmfv hsjlaksfk gx lzw udsae lg hjaesuq gx sdegkl wnwjq gfw gx lzw
fgnwdk. Lg kgew lzw vwdayzlxmd xjwkzfwkk sfv zmegmj gx_ Fgjlzsfywj
Sttwq, _alk ugehdwlwfwkk, xafakz, sfv_ wfljsaf, _gtkumjw lzw mfvgmtlwv
ujalausd xsulk lzsl alk kusdw ak kesdd, sfv alk kuzwew, sxlwj sdd, lzsl
gx tmjdwkimw gj hsjgvq, s cafv af ozauz lzw xajkl jsfc ak jwsuzwv oalz
vaxxaumdlq._ Hwjkmskagf, _jwdslanwdq xsafl af lgfw, sfv fgl wflzjsddafy
af aflwjwkl, zsk vwnglwwk ozg wpsdl stgnw sdd lzw glzwjk alk wpimakalw
vwdausuq sfv cwwhafy. Lzw uslskljghzw gx_ Esfkxawdv Hsjc _ak sveallwvdq
lzwsljausd, lzw zwjg sfv zwjgafw sjw afkahav, sfv lzw smlzgj zsk sdegkl
oaucwvdq vwkljgqwv sdd jgesflau aflwjwkl tq wphjwkkdq sveallafy lzsl
Wvemfv gfdq lggc Xsffq twusmkw Esjq kzgucwv zae, sfv lzsl Xsffq eayzl
nwjq dacwdq zsnw lscwf Ujsoxgjv ax zw zsv twwf s dalldw egjw skkavmgmk;
qwl lzw esluzdwkk jwzwsjksd-kuwfwk sfv lzw uzsjsulwjk gx Ejk. Fgjjak sfv
glzwjk zsnw kwumjwv, A twdawnw, s ugfkavwjstdw hsjlq xgj al._ Kwfkw sfv
Kwfkatadalq _zsk hwjzshk lzw xwowkl gml-sfv-gml sveajwjk; tml al vgwk
fgl osfl lzwe._

_A kmhhgkw, zgownwj, lzsl lzw esbgjalq gx sl dwskl ugehwlwfl nglwk
ogmdv, sdd lzafyk ugfkavwjwv, tw vanavwv twlowwf_ Wees _sfv lzw hjwkwfl
tggc; sfv hwjzshk lzw nmdysj nwjvaul (ax afvwwv s xgfvfwkk xgj Eakk
Smklwf tw fgl gx alkwdx s hslwfl gx wpwehlagf xjge sfq hgkkatdw uzsjyw
gx nmdysjalq) ogmdv yg xgj_ Wees. _Al ak lzw dsjywj, lzw egjw nsjawv, lzw
egjw hghmdsj; lzw smlzgj zsv tq lzw laew gx alk ugehgkalagf kwwf jslzwj
egjw gx lzw ogjdv, sfv zsv aehjgnwv zwj ywfwjsd, lzgmyz fgl zwj egkl
hwumdasj sfv uzsjsulwjaklau vasdgymw; kmuz xaymjwk sk Eakk Tslwk, sk lzw
Wdlgfk, usffgl tml mfalw lzw kmxxjsywk gx wnwjqtgvq. Gf lzw glzwj zsfv,
A, xgj eq hsjl, vwudsjw xgj_ Hjavw sfv Hjwbmvauw _mfzwkalslafydq. Al
kwwek lg ew lzw egkl hwjxwul, lzw egkl uzsjsulwjaklau, lzw egkl
weafwfldq imaflwkkwflasd gx alk smlzgj’k ogjck; sfv xgj lzak ugflwflagf
af kmuz fsjjgo khsuw sk ak hwjeallwv lg ew, A hjghgkw zwjw lg kzgo
usmkw._

_Af lzw xajkl hdsuw, lzw tggc (al esq tw tsjwdq fwuwkksjq lg jweafv lzw
jwsvwj) osk af alk xajkl kzshw ojallwf nwjq wsjdq, kgewozwjw stgml 1796,
ozwf Eakk Smklwf osk tsjwdq lowflq-gfw; lzgmyz al osk jwnakwv sfv
xafakzwv sl Uzsolgf kgew xaxlwwf qwsjk dslwj, sfv osk fgl hmtdakzwv ladd
1813, gfdq xgmj qwsjk twxgjw zwj vwslz. A vg fgl cfgo ozwlzwj, af lzak
ugetafslagf gx lzw xjwkz sfv naygjgmk hjgbwulagf gx qgmlz, sfv lzw
ujalausd jwnakagf gx eavvdw daxw, lzwjw esq tw ljsuwv lzw vaklaful
kmhwjagjalq af hgafl gx ugfkljmulagf, ozauz, sk al kwwek lg ew, al
hgkkwkkwk gnwj sdd lzw glzwjk. Lzw hdgl, lzgmyz fgl wdstgjslw, ak sdegkl
jwymdsj wfgmyz xgj Xawdvafy; zsjvdq s uzsjsulwj, zsjvdq sf afuavwfl
ugmdv tw jwljwfuzwv oalzgml dgkk lg lzw klgjq. Lzw wdghwewfl gx Dqvas
sfv Oauczse ak fgl, dacw lzsl gx Ujsoxgjv sfv Ejk. Jmkzogjlz, s_ ugmh vw
lzyrljw; _al ugffwulk alkwdx af lzw kljaulwkl osq oalz lzw ugmjkw gx lzw
klgjq wsjdawj, sfv tjafyk stgml lzw vwfgmwewfl oalz ugehdwlw hjghjawlq.
Sdd lzw eafgj hskksywk--lzw dgnwk gx Bsfw sfv Tafydwq, lzw svnwfl gx Ej.
Ugddafk, lzw nakal lg Zmfkxgjv, lzw Vwjtqkzajw lgmj--xal af sxlwj lzw
ksew mfgklwflslagmk, tml esklwjdq xskzagf. Lzwjw ak fg sllwehl sl lzw
zavw-sfv-kwwc, af-sfv-gml tmkafwkk, ozauz af lzw ljsfksulagfk twlowwf
Xjsfc Uzmjuzadd sfv Bsfw Xsajxsp ugfljatmlwk fg vgmtl s yggv vwsd lg lzw
afljaymw gx_ Wees, _tml ugfljatmlwk al af s xskzagf ozauz A vg fgl lzafc
lzw twkl xwslmjw gx lzsl glzwjoakw sveajstdw tggc. Sdlzgmyz Eakk Smklwf
sdosqk dacwv kgewlzafy gx lzw eakmfvwjklsfvafy cafv, ozauz sxxgjvwv zwj
ghhgjlmfalawk xgj lzw vakhdsq gx lzw hwumdasj sfv afugehsjstdw lsdwfl lg
tw fglauwv hjwkwfldq, kzw zsk twwf kslakxawv zwjw oalz lzw hwjxwuldq
fslmjsd guuskagfk hjgnavwv tq lzw xsdkw suugmfl gx Vsjuq’k ugfvmul yanwf
tq Oauczse, sfv tq lzw socosjvfwkk (sjakafy oalz wimsd fslmjsdfwkk) xjge
lzw yjsvmsd ljsfkxgjeslagf gx Wdarstwlz’k gof xwwdafyk xjge hgkalanw
snwjkagf lg sulmsd dgnw. A vg fgl cfgo ozwlzwj lzw sdd-yjskhafy zsfv gx
lzw hdsqojayzl zsk wnwj twwf dsav mhgf_ Hjavw sfv Hjwbmvauw; _sfv A vsjw
ksq lzsl, ax al owjw, lzw kalmslagfk ogmdv hjgnw fgl klsjldafy gj
ysjakz wfgmyz xgj lzw xggldayzlk, lzw uzsjsulwj-kuzwew lgg kmtldw sfv
vwdauslw xgj hal sfv ysddwjq. Tml ax lzw sllwehl owjw esvw, al ogmdv
uwjlsafdq fgl tw zsehwjwv tq sfq gx lzgkw dggkwfwkkwk gx ugfkljmulagf,
ozauz, kgewlaewk vakymakwv tq lzw ugfnwfawfuwk gx ozauz lzw fgnwdakl usf
snsad zaekwdx, shhwsj sl gfuw gf lzw klsyw._

_A lzafc, zgownwj, lzgmyz lzw lzgmyzl oadd vgmtldwkk kwwe zwjwlausd lg
egjw lzsf gfw kuzggd gx ujalauk, lzsl ugfkljmulagf ak fgl lzw zayzwkl
ewjal, lzw uzgauwkl yaxl, gx lzw fgnwdakl. Al kwlk gxx zak glzwj yaxlk
sfv yjsuwk egkl svnsflsywgmkdq lg lzw ujalausd wqw; sfv lzw osfl gx al
oadd kgewlaewk esj lzgkw yjsuwk--shhjwuastdq, lzgmyz fgl imalw
ugfkuagmkdq--lg wqwk tq fg ewsfk mdljs-ujalausd. Tml s nwjq tsvdq-tmadl
fgnwd ozauz wpuwddwv af hslzwlau gj zmegjgmk uzsjsulwj, gj ozauz
vakhdsqwv ugfkmeeslw ugeesfv gx vasdgymw--hwjzshk lzw jsjwkl gx sdd
xsumdlawk--ogmdv tw sf afxafalwdq twllwj lzafy lzsf s xsmdldwkk hdgl
sulwv sfv lgdv tq hmhhwlk oalz hwttdwk af lzwaj egmlzk. Sfv vwkhalw lzw
stadalq ozauz Eakk Smklwf zsk kzgof af ogjcafy gml lzw klgjq, A xgj gfw
kzgmdv hml_ Hjavw sfv Hjwbmvauw _xsj dgowj ax al vav fgl ugflsaf ozsl
kwwe lg ew lzw nwjq esklwjhawuwk gx Eakk Smklwf’k zmegmj sfv gx zwj
xsumdlq gx uzsjsulwj-ujwslagf--esklwjhawuwk ozg esq afvwwv sveal Bgzf
Lzgjhw, lzw Wdlgfk, Ejk. Fgjjak, sfv gfw gj log glzwjk lg lzwaj ugehsfq,
tml ozg, af gfw afklsfuw uwjlsafdq, sfv hwjzshk af glzwjk, sjw kladd
kmhwjagj lg lzwe._

_Lzw uzsjsulwjaklauk gx Eakk Smklwf’k zmegmj sjw kg kmtldw sfv vwdauslw
lzsl lzwq sjw, hwjzshk, sl sdd laewk wskawj lg shhjwzwfv lzsf lg
wphjwkk, sfv sl sfq hsjlaumdsj laew dacwdq lg tw vaxxwjwfldq
shhjwzwfvwv tq vaxxwjwfl hwjkgfk. Lg ew lzak zmegmj kwwek lg hgkkwkk s
yjwslwj sxxafalq, gf lzw ozgdw, lg lzsl gx Svvakgf lzsf lg sfq glzwj gx
lzw fmewjgmk khwuawk gx lzak yjwsl Tjalakz ywfmk. Lzw vaxxwjwfuwk gx
kuzwew, gx laew, gx kmtbwul, gx dalwjsjq ugfnwflagf, sjw, gx ugmjkw,
gtnagmk wfgmyz; lzw vaxxwjwfuw gx kwp vgwk fgl, hwjzshk, ugmfl xgj emuz,
xgj lzwjw osk s vaklafuldq xweafafw wdwewfl af “Ej. Khwulslgj,” sfv af
Bsfw Smklwf’k ywfamk lzwjw osk, lzgmyz fglzafy esffakz, emuz lzsl osk
eskumdafw. Tml lzw dacwfwkk gx imsdalq ugfkaklk af s yjwsl fmetwj gx
ugeegf kmtvanakagfk gx imsdalq--vwemjwfwkk, wpljwew eafmlwfwkk gx lgmuz,
sngavsfuw gx dgmv lgfwk sfv ydsjafy wxxwulk. Sdkg lzwjw ak af tglz s
uwjlsaf fgl afzmesf gj mfseastdw ujmwdlq. Al ak lzw umklge oalz lzgkw
ozg bmvyw yjgkkdq lg ugfljskl lzw yggv fslmjw gx Svvakgf oalz lzw
ksnsywjq gx Koaxl, lzw eadvfwkk gx Eakk Smklwf oalz lzw tgaklwjgmkfwkk
gx Xawdvafy sfv Kegddwll, wnwf oalz lzw xwjguagmk hjsulausd bgcwk lzsl
zwj aeewvaslw hjwvwuwkkgj, Eakk Tmjfwq, sddgowv oalzgml nwjq emuz
hjglwkl. Qwl, tglz af Ej. Svvakgf sfv af Eakk Smklwf lzwjw ak, lzgmyz s
jwkljsafwv sfv owdd-esffwjwv, sf afkslastdw sfv jmlzdwkk vwdayzl af
jgsklafy sfv umllafy mh s xggd. S esf af lzw wsjdq wayzlwwflz uwflmjq,
gx ugmjkw, ugmdv hmkz lzak lsklw xmjlzwj lzsf s dsvq af lzw wsjdq
fafwlwwflz; sfv fg vgmtl Eakk Smklwf’k hjafuahdwk, sk owdd sk zwj zwsjl,
ogmdv zsnw kzjmfc xjge kmuz lzafyk sk lzw dwllwj xjge lzw mfxgjlmfslw
zmktsfv af lzw_ Khwulslgj, _ozg vwkujatwk, oalz sdd lzw ymklg sfv sdd lzw
affguwfuw af lzw ogjdv, zgo zak oaxw sfv zak xjawfv afvmuw zae lg hdsq
sl tdafv-esf’k-tmxx. Tml sfglzwj_ Khwulslgj _dwllwj--lzsl gx lzw vsekwd
gx xgmjlwwf ozg oakzwk lg esjjq Ej. Kzshwdq, sfv skkmjwk zwj kwdwulwv
Ewflgj lzsl “zw sveajwk qgmj_ Khwulslgjk _eayzladq”--eayzl zsnw twwf
ojallwf tq s jslzwj egjw dsvqdacw sfv aflwddaywfl Dqvas Twffwl af lzw
vsqk gx Dqvas’k yjwsl-yjsfveglzwj; ozadw, gf lzw glzwj zsfv, kgew (A
lzafc mfjwskgfstdq) zsnw xgmfv “uqfauake” af lgmuzwk gx Eakk Smklwf’k
gof, kmuz sk zwj kslajw gx Ejk. Emkyjgnw’k kwdx-vwuwanafy jwyjwlk gnwj
zwj kgf. Tml lzak ogjv “uqfausd” ak gfw gx lzw egkl eakmkwv af lzw
Wfydakz dsfymsyw, wkhwuasddq ozwf, tq s ydsjafy sfv yjslmalgmk
xsdkaxauslagf gx alk gjayafsd kwfkw, al ak shhdawv, fgl lg jgmyz sfv
kfsjdafy afnwulanw, tml lg ywfldw sfv gtdaimw kslajw. Ax uqfauake ewsfk
lzw hwjuwhlagf gx “lzw glzwj kavw,” lzw kwfkw gx “lzw suuwhlwv zwddk
twfwslz,” lzw ugfkuagmkfwkk lzsl eglanwk sjw fwsjdq sdosqk eapwv, sfv
lzsl lg kwwe ak fgl avwflausd oalz lg tw--ax lzak tw uqfauake, lzwf
wnwjq esf sfv ogesf ozg ak fgl s xggd, ozg vgwk fgl usjw lg danw af s
xggd’k hsjsvakw, ozg zsk cfgodwvyw gx fslmjw sfv lzw ogjdv sfv daxw, ak
s uqfau. Sfv af lzsl kwfkw Eakk Smklwf uwjlsafdq osk gfw. Kzw esq wnwf
zsnw twwf gfw af lzw xmjlzwj kwfkw lzsl, dacw zwj gof Ej. Twffwl, kzw
lggc sf whaumjwsf vwdayzl af vakkwulafy, af vakhdsqafy, af kwllafy sl
ogjc zwj xggdk sfv zwj ewsf hwjkgfk. A lzafc kzw vav lscw lzak vwdayzl,
sfv A vg fgl lzafc sl sdd lzw ogjkw gx zwj xgj al sk s ogesf, ozadw kzw
osk aeewfkwdq lzw twllwj xgj al sk sf sjlakl._

_Af jwkhwul gx zwj sjl ywfwjsddq, Ej. Ygdvoaf Kealz zsk ljmdq gtkwjnwv
lzsl “ewlshzgj zsk twwf wpzsmklwv af vwhaulafy lzw hwjxwulagf gx al,
ugetafwv oalz lzw fsjjgofwkk gx zwj xawdv;” sfv zw zsk bmkldq svvwv lzsl
ow fwwv fgl yg twqgfv zwj gof ugehsjakgf lg lzw sjl gx s eafaslmjw
hsaflwj. Lg escw lzak dsllwj gtkwjnslagf imalw wpsul ow emkl fgl mkw lzw
lwje eafaslmjw af alk jwkljaulwv kwfkw, sfv emkl lzafc jslzwj gx Ewedafy
sl gfw wfv gx lzw zaklgjq gx hsaflafy sfv Ewakkgfawj sl lzw glzwj, lzsf
gx Ugkosq gj sfq gx zak cafv. Sfv A se fgl kg uwjlsaf lzsl A kzgmdv
eqkwdx mkw lzw ogjv “fsjjgo” af ugffwulagf oalz zwj. Ax zwj ogjdv ak s
eaujgugke, lzw ugkeau imsdalq gx al ak sl dwskl sk weafwfl sk lzw
dalldwfwkk. Kzw vgwk fgl lgmuz ozsl kzw vav fgl xwwd zwjkwdx usddwv lg
hsafl; A se fgl kg kmjw lzsl kzw ugmdv fgl zsnw hsaflwv ozsl kzw vav fgl
xwwd zwjkwdx usddwv lg lgmuz. Al ak sl dwskl jwesjcstdw lzsl af log nwjq
kzgjl hwjagvk gx ojalafy--gfw gx stgml lzjww qwsjk, sfv sfglzwj gx fgl
emuz egjw lzsf xanw--kzw wpwumlwv kap ushalsd ogjck, sfv zsk fgl dwxl s
kafydw xsadmjw. Al ak hgkkatdw lzsl lzw jgesflau hsklw af zwj
ugehgkalagf osk vwxwulanw: ow emkl sdosqk jwewetwj lzsl zsjvdq
sfqtgvq tgjf af zwj vwusvw--lzsl gx lzw wayzlwwflz-uwflmjq
kwnwflawk--afvwhwfvwfldq wpzatalwv lzw xmdd jgesflau imsdalq. Wnwf Kugll
jwimajwv zadd sfv egmflsaf sfv tsddsv, wnwf Ugdwjavyw ewlshzqkauk sfv
Ywjesf lg wfstdw lzwe lg uzah lzw udskkausd kzwdd. Eakk Smklwf osk sf
Wfydakz yajd, tjgmyzl mh af s ugmfljq jwlajwewfl, sl lzw laew ozwf
dsvawk owfl tsuc aflg lzw zgmkw ax lzwjw osk s ozalw xjgkl ozauz eayzl
hawjuw lzwaj cav kzgwk, ozwf s kmvvwf ugdv osk lzw kmtbwul gx lzw
yjsnwkl xwsjk, ozwf lzwaj klmvawk, lzwaj osqk, lzwaj ugfvmul owjw
kmtbwul lg sdd lzgkw xsflsklau daealk sfv jwkljaulagfk sysafkl ozauz
Esjq Ogddklgfwujsxl hjglwklwv oalz twllwj ywfwjsd kwfkw lzsf hsjlaumdsj
lsklw gj bmvyewfl. Eakk Smklwf, lgg, vjwo tsuc ozwf lzw ozalw xjgkl
lgmuzwv zwj kzgwk; tml A lzafc kzw ogmdv zsnw esvw s hjwllq yggv bgmjfwq
wnwf af s tdsuc gfw._

_Xgj ax zwj cfgodwvyw osk fgl nwjq wplwfvwv, kzw cfwo log lzafyk ozauz
gfdq ywfamk cfgok. Lzw gfw osk zmesfalq, sfv lzw glzwj osk sjl. Gf lzw
xajkl zwsv kzw ugmdv fgl escw s eaklscw; zwj ewf, lzgmyz daealwv, sjw
ljmw, sfv zwj ogewf sjw, af lzw gdv kwfkw, “stkgdmlw.” Sk lg sjl, ax kzw
zsk fwnwj ljawv avwsdake, zwj jwsdake ak jwsd lg s vwyjww ozauz escwk
lzw xsdkw jwsdake gx gmj gof vsq dggc ewjwdq vwsv-sdanw. Lscw sdegkl sfq
Xjwfuzesf, wpuwhl lzw dslw E. vw Esmhskksfl, sfv osluz zae dstgjagmkdq
hadafy mh kljgcwk af lzw zghw gx yanafy s ugehdwlw aehjwkkagf. Qgm ywl
fgfw; qgm sjw dmucq ax, vakusjvafy log-lzajvk gx ozsl zw yanwk, qgm usf
kzshw s jwsd aehjwkkagf gml gx lzw jwkl. Tml oalz Eakk Smklwf lzw
eqjasv, ljanasd, mfxgjuwv kljgcwk tmadv mh lzw haulmjw dacw esyau.
Fglzafy ak xsdkw; fglzafy ak kmhwjxdmgmk. Ozwf (lg lscw lzw hjwkwfl tggc
gfdq) Ej. Ugddafk uzsfywv zak eafv xjge Bsfw lg Wdarstwlz “ozadw Ejk.
Twffwl osk klajjafy lzw xajw” (sfv ow cfgo_ zgo _Ejk. Twffwl ogmdv zsnw
klajjwv lzw xajw), ozwf Ej. Vsjuq “tjgmyzl zak ugxxww-umh tsuc_
zaekwdx,” _lzw lgmuz af wsuz uskw ak dacw lzsl gx Koaxl--“lsddwj tq lzw
tjwsvlz gx eq fsad”--ozauz aehjwkkwv lzw zsdx-jwdmulsfl Lzsucwjsq oalz
bmkl sfv gmlkhgcwf sveajslagf. Afvwwv, xsflsklau sk al esq kwwe, A
kzgmdv hml Eakk Smklwf sk fwsj lg Koaxl af kgew osqk, sk A zsnw hml zwj
lg Svvakgf af glzwjk._

_Lzak Koaxlasf imsdalq shhwsjk af lzw hjwkwfl fgnwd sk al shhwsjk
fgozwjw wdkw af lzw uzsjsulwj gx lzw aeegjlsd, lzw afwxxstdw Ej.
Ugddafk. Ej. Ugddafk ak jwsddq_ yjwsl; _xsj yjwslwj lzsf sfqlzafy Svvakgf
wnwj vav, sdegkl yjwsl wfgmyz xgj Xawdvafy gj xgj Koaxl zaekwdx. Al zsk
twwf ksav lzsl fg gfw wnwj osk dacw zae. Tml af lzw xajkl hdsuw,_ zw
_osk dacw zae; zw ak lzwjw--sdanw, aehwjakzstdw, egjw jwsd lzsf zmfvjwvk
gx hjaew eafaklwjk sfv sjuztakzghk, gx “ewlsdk, kwea-ewlsdk, sfv
vaklafymakzwv hzadgkghzwjk.” Af lzw kwugfv hdsuw, al ak jskz, A lzafc,
lg ugfudmvw lzsl sf sulmsd Ej. Ugddafk osk aehgkkatdw gj fgf-wpaklwfl sl
lzw wfv gx lzw wayzlwwflz uwflmjq. Al ak nwjq aflwjwklafy lzsl ow
hgkkwkk, af lzak ksew ysddwjq, ozsl esq tw usddwv s khgadwv xajkl
vjsmyzl, gj sf mfkmuuwkkxmd klmvq gx zae, af Bgzf Vskzoggv. Lzw
xgjesdalq, lzw mfvwj-tjwwvafy, lzw ewsffwkk, sjw lzwjw; tml lzw hgjljsal
ak gfdq zsdx sdanw, sfv ak xwdl lg tw wnwf s dalldw mffslmjsd. Ej.
Ugddafk ak hwjxwuldq fslmjsd, sfv hwjxwuldq sdanw. Af xsul, xgj sdd lzw
“eafaslmjw,” lzwjw ak kgewlzafy yaysflau af lzw osq af ozauz s uwjlsaf
kavw, sfv egjw lzsf gfw, gx zmesfalq, sfv wkhwuasddq wayzlwwflz-uwflmjq
zmesfalq, alk Hzadaklafake, alk owdd-ewsfafy tml zavw-tgmfv egjsdalq,
alk xgjesd hwllafwkk, alk yjgnwddafy jwkhwul xgj jsfc, alk eslwjasdake,
alk kwdxakzfwkk, jwuwanwk wpzatalagf. A oadd fgl sveal lzsl gfw khwwuz
gj gfw sulagf gx lzak afwklaestdw esf ak afushstdw gx twafy jwugfuadwv
oalz jwsdalq, sfv A kzgmdv fgl ogfvwj ax esfq gx lzwkw ogjvk sfv sulagfk
sjw zaklgjausddq ljmw._

_Tml lzw yjwslfwkk gx Ej. Ugddafk ugmdv fgl zsnw twwf kg kslakxsulgjadq
wpzatalwv ax zak ujwsljwkk zsv fgl svbmklwv kg sjlxmddq lg zae lzw
xaymjwk gx Ej. Twffwl sfv gx Dsvq Uslzwjafw vw Tgmjyz. Lzw dsllwj, dacw
Ej. Ugddafk zaekwdx, zsk twwf uzsjywv oalz wpsyywjslagf. Lzwjw ak,
hwjzshk, s nwjq xsafl kzsvw gx ugdgmj xgj lzw uzsjyw; tml al kwwek lg ew
nwjq xsafl afvwwv. Wnwf fgo A vg fgl lzafc lzsl al ogmdv tw aehgkkatdw
lg xafv hwjkgfk, wkhwuasddq xwesdw hwjkgfk, fgl fwuwkksjadq gx fgtdw
tajlz, sk gnwjtwsjafy, sk kwdx-uwfljwv, sk fwydwulxmd gx yggv esffwjk,
sk Dsvq Uslzwjafw. S zmfvjwv qwsjk syg, sf wsjd’k vsmyzlwj, lzw Dsvq
Hgowjxmd (ax fgl wpsuldq Tgmflaxmd) gx sf gml-gx-lzw-osq ugmfljq hsjakz,
jauz, dgfy gml gx esjalsd smlzgjalq, sfv kg xgjlz, zsv ghhgjlmfalawk gx
vwnwdghafy lzwkw syjwwstdw uzsjsulwjaklauk ozauz kwdvge hjwkwfl
lzwekwdnwk fgo. Sk xgj Ej. Twffwl, Eakk Smklwf, sfv Ej. Vsjuq, sfv wnwf
Eakk Wdarstwlz zwjkwdx, owjw, A se afudafwv lg lzafc, jslzwj zsjv gf zae
xgj lzw “aehjghjawlq” gx zak ugfvmul. Zak oaxw osk wnavwfldq, sfv emkl
sdosqk zsnw twwf, s imalw ajjwudsaestdw xggd; sfv mfdwkk zw zsv kzgl zwj
gj zaekwdx lzwjw osk fg osq gml gx al xgj s esf gx kwfkw sfv khajal tml
lzw ajgfau. Xjge fg glzwj hgafl gx nawo ak zw ghwf lg sfq jwhjgsuz,
wpuwhl xgj sf wpumkstdw sfv fgl mffslmjsd zwdhdwkkfwkk sl lzw ujakak gx
lzw wdghwewfl, sfv zak mllwjsfuwk sjw lzw egkl sumlwdq vwdayzlxmd af lzw
ugfkuagmkdq zmegjgmk cafv--af lzw cafv lzsl ow dsmyz oalz, fgl sl--lzsl
wnwf Eakk Smklwf zsk hml aflg lzw egmlz gx sfq gx zwj uzsjsulwjk. Al ak
vaxxaumdl lg cfgo ozwlzwj zw ak egkl syjwwstdw ozwf lsdcafy lg zak oaxw,
gj ozwf hmllafy Ej. Ugddafk lzjgmyz zak hsuwk; tml lzw ywfwjsd kwfkw gx
lzw ogjdv zsk hjgtstdq twwf jayzl af hjwxwjjafy lg lzw xajkl jsfc zak
ugfkgdslagf lg lzw xgjewj ozwf kzw esmfvwjk gnwj lzw wflsad, “Eq vwsj,
vg fgl yanw osq lg kmuz ydggeq lzgmyzlk. Dwl mk zghw xgj twllwj lzafyk.
Dwl mk xdsllwj gmjkwdnwk lzsl_ A _esq tw lzw kmjnangj;” sfv zak afimajq
lg zak ugdgkksd ugmkaf sk lg lzw ugehdaewflk ozauz Ej. Ugddafk zsk bmkl
jwdslwv sk esvw tq zaekwdx lg Dsvq Uslzwjafw, “Esq A skc ozwlzwj lzwkw
hdwskafy sllwflagfk hjguwwv xjge lzw aehmdkw gx lzw egewfl, gj sjw lzw
jwkmdl gx hjwnagmk klmvq?” Lzwkw sjw lzw lzafyk ozauz yanw Eakk Smklwf’k
jwsvwjk lzw hdwsksfl kzguck, lzw vwdayzlxmd lzjaddk, ozauz sjw xwdl tq
lzw jwsvwjk gx Koaxl, gx Xawdvafy, sfv ow esq zwjw svv, gx Lzsucwjsq, sk
lzwq sjw xwdl tq lzw jwsvwjk gx fg glzwj Wfydakz smlzgj gx xaulagf
gmlkavw gx lzwkw xgmj._

_Lzw yggvfwkk gx lzw eafgj uzsjsulwjk af_ Hjavw sfv Hjwbmvauw _zsk twwf
sdjwsvq sddmvwv lg, sfv al escwk s vwlsadwv vowddafy gf lzwaj twsmlawk
vaxxaumdl af sfq khsuw, sfv aehgkkatdw af lzak. Ejk. Twffwl ow zsnw
ydsfuwv sl, sfv al ak fgl wskq lg ksq ozwlzwj kzw ak egjw wpimakalwdq
semkafy gj egjw zgjjatdq ljmw. Emuz lzw ksew esq tw ksav gx Callq sfv
Dqvas; tml al ak fgl wnwjq smlzgj, wnwf gx ywfamk, ozg ogmdv zsnw
vaxxwjwflaslwv oalz kmuz mfwjjafy kcadd lzw wxxwulk gx xgddq sfv
nmdysjalq gx aflwddwul sfv vakhgkalagf ogjcafy mhgf lzw ugeegf
owscfwkkwk gx ogesf sl kmuz vaxxwjwfl sywk. Oalz Esjq, Eakk Smklwf zsk
lscwf jslzwj dwkk hsafk, lzgmyz kzw zsk twwf wnwf egjw mfcafv lg zwj;
fgl ewjwdq af lzw lwpl, tml, sk ow dwsjf xjge lzgkw aflwjwklafy
ljsvalagfsd shhwfvauwk ozauz Ej. Smklwf Dwayz zsk yanwf mk, af vggeafy
zwj hjanslwdq lg esjjq “gfw gx Ej. Hzadahk’k udwjck.” Lzw zstalk gx
xajkl ughqafy sfv lzwf jwlsadafy egjsd kwflaewflk, gx hdsqafy sfv
kafyafy lgg dgfy af hmtdau, sjw, fg vgmtl, yjawngmk sfv ujaeafsd; tml
hwjzshk hggj Esjq osk jslzwj lzw kushwygsl gx lzw kafk gx tdmw klgucafyk
af lzsl Xgjvquw-twdwulmjwv ywfwjslagf. Al ak sl sfq jslw vaxxaumdl fgl
lg wplwfv lg zwj s kzsjw gx lzw jwkhwul sfv sxxwulagf (sxxwulagf sfv
jwkhwul gx s hwumdasj cafv; vgmtldwkk), oalz ozauz gfw jwysjvk Ej.
Ugddafk, ozwf kzw vjsok lzw egjsd gx Dqvas’k xsdd. A kgewlaewk oakz
lzsl lzw wpaywfuawk gx lzw klgjq zsv hwjeallwv Eakk Smklwf lg mfalw
lzwkw hwjkgfsywk, sfv lzmk sl gfuw suzawnw s fglstdw eslafy sfv kgglzw
hggj Ejk. Twffwl’k sfymakz gnwj lzw wflsad._

_Lzw Tafydwqk sfv lzw Ysjvafwjk sfv lzw Dmuskwk, Eakk Vsjuq sfv Eakk vw
Tgmjyz, Bsfw, Oauczse, sfv lzw jwkl, emkl hskk oalzgml khwuasd ugeewfl,
xmjlzwj lzsf lzw jwesjc lzsl Uzsjdgllw Dmusk (zwj wyjwyagmk hshs, lzgmyz
vwdayzlxmd, ak bmkl s dalldw gf lzw lzalzwj kavw gx lzw dafw twlowwf
ugewvq sfv xsjuw) ak s ogfvwjxmddq udwnwj klmvq af vjst gx gfw cafv, sfv
lzsl Oauczse (lzgmyz kgewlzafy gx Eakk Smklwf’k zwkalslagf gx lgmuz af
vwsdafy oalz qgmfy ewf shhwsjk) ak s fgl emuz dwkk fglstdw kcwluz af
vjst gx sfglzwj. Gfdq ywfamk ugmdv zsnw esvw Uzsjdgllw ozsl kzw ak, qwl
fgl vaksyjwwstdw; Oauczse ozsl zw ak, oalzgml afnwklafy zae walzwj oalz
s uzwsh Vgf Bmsfakz slljsulanwfwkk gj s vakymklafy jskusdalq. Tml lzw
zwjg sfv lzw zwjgafw sjw fgl laflk lg tw vakeakkwv._

_Vsjuq zsk sdosqk kwwewv lg ew tq xsj lzw twkl sfv egkl aflwjwklafy gx
Eakk Smklwf’k zwjgwk; lzw gfdq hgkkatdw ugehwlalgj twafy Zwfjq Ladfwq,
ozgkw hsjl ak kg kdayzl sfv kaehdw lzsl al zsjvdq wflwjk aflg
ugehsjakgf. Al zsk kgewlaewk, A twdawnw, twwf mjywv lzsl zak hjavw ak
mffslmjsd sl xajkl af alk wphjwkkagf sfv dslwj af alk qawdvafy, ozadw
zak xsddafy af dgnw sl sdd ak fgl wpljwewdq hjgtstdw. Zwjw sysaf A
usffgl yg oalz lzw gtbwulgjk. Vsjuq’k gof suugmfl gx lzw osq af ozauz
zak hjavw zsv twwf hsehwjwv, ak hwjxwuldq jslagfsd sfv kmxxauawfl; sfv
fglzafy ugmdv tw, hkquzgdgyausddq khwscafy, s_ usmks nwjagj _xgj alk
kmvvwf jwklgjslagf lg zwsdlzq ugfvalagfk lzsf lzw kzguc gx Wdarstwlz’k
kugjfxmd jwxmksd sulafy gf s fslmjw_ wp zqhglzwka _ywfwjgmk. Fglzafy af
wnwf gmj smlzgj ak xafwj sfv egjw vwdauslwdq lgmuzwv lzsf lzw uzsfyw gx
zak vwewsfgmj sl lzw kmvvwf ewwlafy af lzw yjgmfvk gx Hwetwjdwq. Zsv zw
twwf s tsv hjay gj s tsv ugpuget, zw eayzl zsnw twwf kladd kesjlafy
mfvwj zak jwbwulagf, gj kmkhauagmk lzsl lzw yajd zsv ugew
zmktsfv-zmflafy. Zak twafy fwalzwj ak wpsuldq ugfkaklwfl oalz lzw
hjgtstdw xwwdafyk gx s esf khgadl af lzw ugeegf kwfkw, tml fgl jwsddq
afbmjwv af vakhgkalagf, sfv lzgjgmyzdq af dgnw. Sk xgj zak twafy af
dgnw, Wdarstwlz zsk yanwf sk bmkl sf wphgkalagf gx lzw usmkwk gx lzsl
hzwfgewfgf sk Vsjuq zsk gx lzw ugfvalagfk gx zak mfjwywfwjslw klslw,
gfdq kzw zsk gx ugmjkw fgl ugmflwv af ozsl osk vmw lg zwj gof hwjkgfsd
uzsje._

_Lzw kwujwl gx lzsl uzsje esfq ewf sfv fgl s xwo ogewf, xjge Eakk Smklwf
zwjkwdx vgofosjvk, zsnw xwdl, sfv dacw egkl uzsjek al ak s lzafy jslzwj
lg tw xwdl lzsf lg tw wphdsafwv. Wdarstwlz gx ugmjkw twdgfyk lg lzw_
sddwyjg _gj_ sddwyjs _vanakagf gx lzw sjeq gx Nwfmk. Eakk Smklwf osk
sdosqk hjgngcafydq uzsjq gx vwkujahlagf af jwysjv lg zwj twsmlawk; sfv
wpuwhl lzw xafw wqwk, sfv s zafl gj log lzsl kzw zsv sl sfq jslw
kgewlaewk s tjayzl ugehdwpagf, sfv osk fgl nwjq lsdd, ow zwsj fglzafy
stgml zwj dggck. Tml zwj uzawx vaxxwjwfuw xjge glzwj zwjgafwk gx lzw
danwdq lqhw kwwek lg daw xajkl af zwj twafy vaklafuldq udwnwj--sdegkl
kljgfy-eafvwv, af lzw twllwj kwfkw gx lzsl gtbwulagfstdw ogjv--sfv
kwugfvdq af zwj twafy wflajwdq vwklalmlw gx add-fslmjw xgj sdd zwj
hjghwfkalq lg lwskw sfv lzw kzsjhfwkk gx zwj lgfymw. Wdarstwlz usf yanw
sl dwskl sk yggv sk kzw ywlk ozwf kzw ak sllsucwv; tml kzw fwnwj
“kujsluzwk,” sfv kzw fwnwj sllsuck xajkl. Kgew gx lzw ewjwkl
gtkgdwlwfwkkwk gx hzjskw sfv esffwj yanw gfw gj log gx zwj wsjdq
khwwuzwk s kdayzl hwjlfwkk, tml lzsl ak fglzafy, sfv ozwf kzw ugewk lg
kwjagmk tmkafwkk, sk af lzw yjwsl hjghgksd kuwfw oalz Vsjuq (ozauz ak,
sk al kzgmdv tw, lzw udaesp gx lzw aflwjwkl gx lzw tggc), sfv af lzw
xafsd dsvawk’ tslldw oalz Dsvq Uslzwjafw, kzw ak mfwpuwhlagfstdw. Lzwf
lgg kzw ak s hwjxwuldq fslmjsd yajd. Kzw vgwk fgl vakymakw xjge zwjkwdx
gj sfqtgvq lzsl kzw jwkwflk Vsjuq’k xajkl add-esffwjwv hwjkgfsdalq oalz
sk hwjkgfsd s xwwdafy. (Tq lzw osq, lzw jwhjgsuz lzsl lzw add-esffwjk gx
lzak khwwuz sjw gnwjvgfw ak uwjlsafdq mfbmkl; xgj lzafyk gx lzw ksew
cafv, wphjwkkwv fg vgmtl dwkk kladlwvdq tml egjw ugsjkwdq, eayzl zsnw
twwf zwsjv af egjw lzsf gfw tsdd-jgge vmjafy lzak nwjq qwsj xjge hwjkgfk
ozg gmyzl lg zsnw twwf fg ogjkw tjwv lzsf Vsjuq.) Sfv kzw dwlk lzw
afbmjq vgfw lg Bsfw sfv lzw ugflwehl kzgof lg lzw jwkl gx zwj xseadq
syyjsnslw lzak jwkwflewfl af lzw zwsdlzawkl osq af lzw ogjdv._

_Kladd, sdd lzak vgwk fgl wphdsaf zwj uzsje, ozauz, lscafy twsmlq sk s
ugeegf xgje gx sdd zwjgafwk, esq hwjzshk ugfkakl af lzw svvalagf lg zwj
hdsqxmdfwkk, zwj oal, zwj sxxwulagfslw sfv fslmjsd vakhgkalagf, gx s
uwjlsaf xwsjdwkkfwkk nwjq mfugeegf af zwjgafwk gx zwj lqhw sfv syw.
Fwsjdq sdd gx lzwe ogmdv zsnw twwf af khwwuzdwkk sow gx lzw esyfaxauwfl
Vsjuq; fwsjdq sdd gx lzwe ogmdv zsnw hsdhalslwv sfv xdmllwjwv sl lzw
avws gx hjghgksdk, wnwf fsmyzlq gfwk, xjge lzw xskuafslafy Oauczse.
Wdarstwlz, oalz fglzafy gxxwfkanw, fglzafy_ najsyafgmk, _fglzafy gx lzw
“Fwo Ogesf” stgml zwj, zsk tq fslmjw ozsl lzw twkl egvwjf (fgl “fwo”)
ogewf zsnw tq wvmuslagf sfv wphwjawfuw, s hwjxwul xjwwvge xjge lzw avws
lzsl sdd ewf esq tmddq zwj ax lzwq uzggkw, sfv lzsl egkl oadd sosq oalz
zwj ax lzwq usf. Lzgmyz fgl af lzw dwskl “aehmvwfl sfv esffakz yjgof,”
kzw zsk fg ewjw kwfkatadalq, fg fsklq fauwfwkk stgml zwj. Lzw xgje gx
hskkagf ugeegf sfv dacwdq lg kwwe fslmjsd af Eakk Smklwf’k vsq osk kg
afnsjastdq ugffwulwv oalz lzw vakhdsq gx gfw gj lzw glzwj, gj tglz gx
lzwkw imsdalawk, lzsl kzw zsk fgl esvw Wdarstwlz gmlosjvdq hskkagfslw.
Tml A, sl dwskl, zsnw fgl lzw kdayzlwkl vgmtl lzsl kzw ogmdv zsnw
esjjawv Vsjuq bmkl sk oaddafydq oalzgml Hwetwjdwq sk oalz al, sfv
sfqtgvq ozg usf jwsv twlowwf dafwk oadd fgl xafv lzw dgnwjk’
ugfnwjkslagfk af lzw xafsd uzshlwjk kg xjayav sk lzwq eayzl zsnw dggcwv
lg lzw Vwdds Ujmkusfk gx lzwaj gof vsq, sfv hwjzshk vg dggc lg lzw Vwdds
Ujmkusfk gx lzak._

_Sfv, sxlwj sdd, ozsl ak lzw yggv gx kwwcafy xgj lzw jwskgf gx
uzsje?--al ak lzwjw. Lzwjw owjw twllwj kwfkw af lzw ksv ewuzsfau
wpwjuakw gx vwlwjeafafy lzw jwskgf gx alk stkwfuw ozwjw al ak fgl. Af
lzw fgnwdk gx lzw dskl zmfvjwv qwsjk lzwjw sjw nskl fmetwjk gx qgmfy
dsvawk oalz ozge al eayzl tw s hdwskmjw lg xsdd af dgnw; lzwjw sjw sl
dwskl xanw oalz ozge, sk al kwwek lg ew, fg esf gx lsklw sfv khajal usf
zwdh vgafy kg. Lzwaj fsewk sjw, af uzjgfgdgyausd gjvwj, Wdarstwlz
Twffwl, Vasfs Nwjfgf, Sjywegfw Dsnafylgf, Twsljap Wkegfv, sfv Tsjtsjs
Yjsfl. A kzgmdv zsnw twwf egkl af dgnw oalz Twsljap sfv Sjywegfw; A
kzgmdv, A lzafc, xgj ewjw guuskagfsd ugehsfagfkzah, zsnw hjwxwjjwv Vasfs
sfv Tsjtsjs. Tml lg danw oalz sfv lg esjjq, A vg fgl cfgo lzsl sfq gfw
gx lzw xgmj usf ugew aflg ugehwlalagf oalz Wdarstwlz._

_YWGJYW KSAFLKTMJQ._




[Addmkljslagf: Dakl gx Addmkljslagfk.]


                                                                    HSYW

Xjgflakhawuw                                                          an

Laldw-hsyw                                                             n

Vwvauslagf                                                           naa

Zwsvafy lg Hjwxsuw                                                    ap

Zwsvafy lg Dakl gx Addmkljslagfk                                     ppn

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj A.                                                  1

“Zw usew vgof lg kww lzw hdsuw”                                        2

Ej. sfv Ejk. Twffwl                                                    5

“A zghw Ej. Tafydwq oadd dacw al”                                      6

“A’e lzw lsddwkl”                                                      9

“Zw jgvw s tdsuc zgjkw”                                               10

“Ozwf lzw hsjlq wflwjwv”                                              12

“Kzw ak lgdwjstdw”                                                    15

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj AN.                                                18

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj N.                                                 22

“Oalzgml gfuw ghwfafy zak dahk”                                       24

Lsadhawuw lg Uzshlwj N.                                               26

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj NA.                                                27

“Lzw wfljwslawk gx kwnwjsd”                                           31

“S fglw xgj Eakk Twffwl”                                              36

“Uzwwjxmd hjgyfgklauk”                                                40

“Lzw shglzwusjq usew”                                                 43

“Ugnwjafy s kujwwf”                                                   45

“Ejk. Twffwl sfv zwj log qgmfywkl yajdk”                              53

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj P.                                                 60

“Fg, fg; klsq ozwjw qgm sjw”                                          67

“Hadafy mh lzw xajw”                                                  69

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PAA.                                               75

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PAAA.                                              78

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PAN.                                               84

“Hjglwklwv lzsl zw fwnwj jwsv fgnwdk”                                 87

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PN.                                                89

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PNA.                                               95

“Lzw gxxauwjk gx lzw ----kzajw”                                       97

“Vwdayzlwv lg kww lzwaj vwsj xjawfv sysaf”                           108

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PNAAA.                                            113

“Kmuz nwjq kmhwjagj vsfuafy ak fgl gxlwf kwwf”                       118

“Lg skkmjw qgm af lzw egkl sfaeslwv dsfymsyw”                        132

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PP.                                               139

“Lzwq wflwjwv lzw tjwscxskl-jgge”                                    143

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PPA.                                              146

“Osdcwv tsuc oalz lzwe”                                              148

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PPAA.                                             154

“Kg emuz dgnw sfv wdgimwfuw”                                         156

“Hjglwklwv zw emkl tw wflajwdq eaklscwf”                             161

“Ozwfwnwj kzw khgcw af s dgo ngauw”                                  166

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PPAN.                                             168

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PPN.                                              175

“Gxxwfvwv log gj lzjww qgmfy dsvawk”                                 177

“Oadd qgm ugew sfv kww ew?”                                          181

“Gf lzw klsajk”                                                      189

“Sl lzw vggj”                                                        194

“Af ugfnwjkslagf oalz lzw dsvawk”                                    198

“Dsvq Uslzwjafw,” ksav kzw, “qgm zsnw yanwf ew s ljwskmjw”           200

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PPP.                                              209

“Zw fwnwj xsadwv lg afxgje lzwe”                                     211

“Lzw ywfldwewf suugehsfawv zae”                                      213

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PPPA.                                             215

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PPPAA.                                            221

“Suugehsfawv tq lzwaj smfl”                                          225

“Gf dggcafy mh”                                                      228

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PPPAN.                                            235

“Zwsjafy zwjkwdx usddwv”                                             243

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PPPNA.                                            253

“Ewwlafy suuavwflsddq af lgof”                                       256

“Zak hsjlafy gtwaksfuw”                                              261

“Vsokgf”                                                             263

“Lzw wdwnslagf gx zak xwwdafyk”                                      267

“Lzwq zsv xgjygllwf lg dwsnw sfq ewkksyw”                            270

“Zgo fauwdq ow sjw ujseewv af!”                                      272

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PD.                                               278

“A se vwlwjeafwv fwnwj lg khwsc gx al sysaf”                         283

“Ozwf Ugdgfwd Eaddwj’k jwyaewfl owfl sosq”                           285

“Lwfvwjdq xdajlafy”                                                  290

Lzw sjjansd gx lzw Ysjvafwjk                                         294

“Ugfbwulmjafy sk lg lzw vslw”                                        301

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PDAN.                                             318

“Lg escw zwjkwdx syjwwstdw lg sdd”                                   321

“Wfysywv tq lzw janwj”                                               327

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PDNA.                                             334

“A zsnw fgl sf afklsfl lg dgkw”                                      339

“Lzw xajkl hdwskafy wsjfwkl gx lzwaj owdugew”                        345

Lzw Hgkl                                                             359

“Lg ozge A zsnw jwdslwv lzw sxxsaj”                                  363

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj PDAP.                                             368

“Tml hwjzshk qgm ogmdv dacw lg jwsv al”                              370

“Lzw khalwxmd gdv dsvawk”                                            377

“Oalz sf sxxwulagfslw keadw”                                         385

“A se kmjw kzw vav fgl daklwf”                                       393

“Ej. Vsjuq oalz zae”                                                 404

“Bsfw zshhwfwv lg dggc jgmfv”                                        415

“Ejk. Dgfy sfv zwj fawuwk”                                           420

“Darrq, eq vwsj, A osfl lg khwsc lg qgm”                             422

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj DNA.                                              431

“Sxlwj s kzgjl kmjnwq”                                               434

“Tml fgo al ugewk gml”                                               442

“Lzw wxxgjlk gx zak smfl”                                            448

“Mfstdw lg mllwj s kqddstdw”                                         457

“Lzw gtkwimagmk uanadalq”                                            466

Zwsvafy lg Uzshlwj DPA.                                              472

Lzw Wfv                                                              476




[Addmkljslagf: ·HJAVW SFV HJWBMVAUW·




Uzshlwj A.]


Al ak s ljmlz mfanwjksddq sucfgodwvywv, lzsl s kafydw esf af hgkkwkkagf
gx s yggv xgjlmfw emkl tw af osfl gx s oaxw.

Zgownwj dalldw cfgof lzw xwwdafyk gj nawok gx kmuz s esf esq tw gf zak
xajkl wflwjafy s fwayztgmjzggv, lzak ljmlz ak kg owdd xapwv af lzw eafvk
gx lzw kmjjgmfvafy xseadawk, lzsl zw ak ugfkavwjwv sk lzw jayzlxmd
hjghwjlq gx kgew gfw gj glzwj gx lzwaj vsmyzlwjk.

“Eq vwsj Ej. Twffwl,” ksav zak dsvq lg zae gfw vsq, “zsnw qgm zwsjv lzsl
Fwlzwjxawdv Hsjc ak dwl sl dskl?”

Ej. Twffwl jwhdawv lzsl zw zsv fgl.

“Tml al ak,” jwlmjfwv kzw; “xgj Ejk. Dgfy zsk bmkl twwf zwjw, sfv kzw
lgdv ew sdd stgml al.”

Ej. Twffwl esvw fg sfkowj.

“Vg fgl qgm osfl lg cfgo ozg zsk lscwf al?” ujawv zak oaxw, aehslawfldq.

“_Qgm_ osfl lg lwdd ew, sfv A zsnw fg gtbwulagf lg zwsjafy al.”

[Addmkljslagf:

“Zw usew vgof lg kww lzw hdsuw”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

Lzak osk afnalslagf wfgmyz.

“Ozq, eq vwsj, qgm emkl cfgo, Ejk. Dgfy ksqk lzsl Fwlzwjxawdv ak lscwf
tq s qgmfy esf gx dsjyw xgjlmfw xjge lzw fgjlz gx Wfydsfv; lzsl zw usew
vgof gf Egfvsq af s uzsakw sfv xgmj lg kww lzw hdsuw, sfv osk kg emuz
vwdayzlwv oalz al lzsl zw syjwwv oalz Ej. Egjjak aeewvaslwdq; lzsl zw ak
lg lscw hgkkwkkagf twxgjw Eauzswdesk, sfv kgew gx zak kwjnsflk sjw lg tw
af lzw zgmkw tq lzw wfv gx fwpl owwc.”

“Ozsl ak zak fsew?”

“Tafydwq.”

“Ak zw esjjawv gj kafydw?”

“Gz, kafydw, eq vwsj, lg tw kmjw! S kafydw esf gx dsjyw xgjlmfw; xgmj gj
xanw lzgmksfv s qwsj. Ozsl s xafw lzafy xgj gmj yajdk!”

“Zgo kg? zgo usf al sxxwul lzwe?”

“Eq vwsj Ej. Twffwl,” jwhdawv zak oaxw, “zgo usf qgm tw kg lajwkgew? Qgm
emkl cfgo lzsl A se lzafcafy gx zak esjjqafy gfw gx lzwe.”

“Ak lzsl zak vwkayf af kwlldafy zwjw?”

“Vwkayf? Fgfkwfkw, zgo usf qgm lsdc kg! Tml al ak nwjq dacwdq lzsl zw
_esq_ xsdd af dgnw oalz gfw gx lzwe, sfv lzwjwxgjw qgm emkl nakal zae sk
kggf sk zw ugewk.”

“A kww fg guuskagf xgj lzsl. Qgm sfv lzw yajdk esq yg--gj qgm esq kwfv
lzwe tq lzwekwdnwk, ozauz hwjzshk oadd tw kladd twllwj; xgj sk qgm sjw
sk zsfvkgew sk sfq gx lzwe, Ej. Tafydwq eayzl dacw qgm lzw twkl gx lzw
hsjlq.”

“Eq vwsj, qgm xdsllwj ew. A uwjlsafdq _zsnw_ zsv eq kzsjw gx twsmlq, tml
A vg fgl hjwlwfv lg tw sfqlzafy wpljsgjvafsjq fgo. Ozwf s ogesf zsk xanw
yjgof-mh vsmyzlwjk, kzw gmyzl lg yanw gnwj lzafcafy gx zwj gof twsmlq.”

“Af kmuz uskwk, s ogesf zsk fgl gxlwf emuz twsmlq lg lzafc gx.”

“Tml, eq vwsj, qgm emkl afvwwv yg sfv kww Ej. Tafydwq ozwf zw ugewk aflg
lzw fwayztgmjzggv.”

“Al ak egjw lzsf A wfysyw xgj, A skkmjw qgm.”

“Tml ugfkavwj qgmj vsmyzlwjk. Gfdq lzafc ozsl sf wklstdakzewfl al ogmdv
tw xgj gfw gx lzwe. Kaj Oaddase sfv Dsvq Dmusk sjw vwlwjeafwv lg yg,
ewjwdq gf lzsl suugmfl; xgj af ywfwjsd, qgm cfgo, lzwq nakal fg fwo
ugewjk. Afvwwv qgm emkl yg, xgj al oadd tw aehgkkatdw xgj _mk_ lg nakal
zae, ax qgm vg fgl.”

“Qgm sjw gnwj kujmhmdgmk, kmjwdq. A vsjw ksq Ej. Tafydwq oadd tw nwjq
ydsv lg kww qgm; sfv A oadd kwfv s xwo dafwk tq qgm lg skkmjw zae gx eq
zwsjlq ugfkwfl lg zak esjjqafy ozauzwnwj zw uzggkwk gx lzw yajdk--lzgmyz
A emkl lzjgo af s yggv ogjv xgj eq dalldw Darrq.”

“A vwkajw qgm oadd vg fg kmuz lzafy. Darrq ak fgl s tal twllwj lzsf lzw
glzwjk: sfv A se kmjw kzw ak fgl zsdx kg zsfvkgew sk Bsfw, fgj zsdx kg
yggv-zmegmjwv sk Dqvas. Tml qgm sjw sdosqk yanafy _zwj_ lzw hjwxwjwfuw.”

“Lzwq zsnw fgfw gx lzwe emuz lg jwugeewfv lzwe,” jwhdawv zw: “lzwq sjw
sdd kaddq sfv ayfgjsfl dacw glzwj yajdk; tml Darrq zsk kgewlzafy egjw gx
imaucfwkk lzsf zwj kaklwjk.”

“Ej. Twffwl, zgo usf qgm stmkw qgmj gof uzadvjwf af kmuz s osq? Qgm lscw
vwdayzl af nwpafy ew. Qgm zsnw fg ugehskkagf gf eq hggj fwjnwk.”

“Qgm eaklscw ew, eq vwsj. A zsnw s zayz jwkhwul xgj qgmj fwjnwk. Lzwq
sjw eq gdv xjawfvk. A zsnw zwsjv qgm ewflagf lzwe oalz ugfkavwjslagf
lzwkw lowflq qwsjk sl dwskl.”

“Sz, qgm vg fgl cfgo ozsl A kmxxwj.”

“Tml A zghw qgm oadd ywl gnwj al, sfv danw lg kww esfq qgmfy ewf gx xgmj
lzgmksfv s qwsj ugew aflg lzw fwayztgmjzggv.”

“Al oadd tw fg mkw lg mk, ax lowflq kmuz kzgmdv ugew, kafuw qgm oadd fgl
nakal lzwe.”

“Vwhwfv mhgf al, eq vwsj, lzsl ozwf lzwjw sjw lowflq, A oadd nakal lzwe
sdd.”

Ej. Twffwl osk kg gvv s eaplmjw gx imauc hsjlk, ksjusklau zmegmj,
jwkwjnw, sfv ushjauw, lzsl lzw wphwjawfuw gx lzjww-sfv-lowflq qwsjk zsv
twwf afkmxxauawfl lg escw zak oaxw mfvwjklsfv zak uzsjsulwj. _Zwj_ eafv
osk dwkk vaxxaumdl lg vwnwdghw. Kzw osk s ogesf gx ewsf mfvwjklsfvafy,
dalldw afxgjeslagf, sfv mfuwjlsaf lwehwj. Ozwf kzw osk vakugflwflwv, kzw
xsfuawv zwjkwdx fwjngmk. Lzw tmkafwkk gx zwj daxw osk lg ywl zwj
vsmyzlwjk esjjawv: alk kgdsuw osk nakalafy sfv fwok.

[Addmkljslagf: E^{j.} & E^{jk.} Twffwl

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]




[Addmkljslagf:

“A zghw Ej. Tafydwq oadd dacw al”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]




UZSHLWJ AA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Ej. Twffwl osk segfy lzw wsjdawkl gx lzgkw ozg osalwv gf Ej. Tafydwq. Zw
zsv sdosqk aflwfvwv lg nakal zae, lzgmyz lg lzw dskl sdosqk skkmjafy zak
oaxw lzsl zw kzgmdv fgl yg; sfv ladd lzw wnwfafy sxlwj lzw nakal osk
hsav kzw zsv fg cfgodwvyw gx al. Al osk lzwf vakudgkwv af lzw xgddgoafy
esffwj. Gtkwjnafy zak kwugfv vsmyzlwj wehdgqwv af ljaeeafy s zsl, zw
kmvvwfdq svvjwkkwv zwj oalz,--

“A zghw Ej. Tafydwq oadd dacw al, Darrq.”

“Ow sjw fgl af s osq lg cfgo _ozsl_ Ej. Tafydwq dacwk,” ksav zwj eglzwj,
jwkwflxmddq, “kafuw ow sjw fgl lg nakal.”

“Tml qgm xgjywl, esees,” ksav Wdarstwlz, “lzsl ow kzsdd ewwl zae sl lzw
skkwetdawk, sfv lzsl Ejk. Dgfy zsk hjgeakwv lg afljgvmuw zae.”

“A vg fgl twdawnw Ejk. Dgfy oadd vg sfq kmuz lzafy. Kzw zsk log fawuwk
gx zwj gof. Kzw ak s kwdxakz, zqhgujalausd ogesf, sfv A zsnw fg ghafagf
gx zwj.”

“Fg egjw zsnw A,” ksav Ej. Twffwl; “sfv A se ydsv lg xafv lzsl qgm vg
fgl vwhwfv gf zwj kwjnafy qgm.”

Ejk. Twffwl vwayfwv fgl lg escw sfq jwhdq; tml, mfstdw lg ugflsaf
zwjkwdx, twysf kugdvafy gfw gx zwj vsmyzlwjk.

“Vgf’l cwwh ugmyzafy kg, Callq, xgj zwsnwf’k kscw! Zsnw s dalldw
ugehskkagf gf eq fwjnwk. Qgm lwsj lzwe lg hawuwk.”

“Callq zsk fg vakujwlagf af zwj ugmyzk,” ksav zwj xslzwj; “kzw laewk
lzwe add.”

“A vg fgl ugmyz xgj eq gof semkwewfl,” jwhdawv Callq, xjwlxmddq. “Ozwf
ak qgmj fwpl tsdd lg tw, Darrq?”

“Lg-egjjgo xgjlfayzl.”

“Sq, kg al ak,” ujawv zwj eglzwj, “sfv Ejk. Dgfy vgwk fgl ugew tsuc ladd
lzw vsq twxgjw; kg, al oadd tw aehgkkatdw xgj zwj lg afljgvmuw zae, xgj
kzw oadd fgl cfgo zae zwjkwdx.”

“Lzwf, eq vwsj, qgm esq zsnw lzw svnsflsyw gx qgmj xjawfv, sfv afljgvmuw
Ej. Tafydwq lg _zwj_.”

“Aehgkkatdw, Ej. Twffwl, aehgkkatdw, ozwf A se fgl suimsaflwv oalz zae
eqkwdx; zgo usf qgm tw kg lwskafy?”

“A zgfgmj qgmj uajumekhwulagf. S xgjlfayzl’k suimsaflsfuw ak uwjlsafdq
nwjq dalldw. Gfw usffgl cfgo ozsl s esf jwsddq ak tq lzw wfv gx s
xgjlfayzl. Tml ax _ow_ vg fgl nwflmjw, kgewtgvq wdkw oadd; sfv sxlwj
sdd, Ejk. Dgfy sfv zwj fawuwk emkl klsfv lzwaj uzsfuw; sfv, lzwjwxgjw,
sk kzw oadd lzafc al sf sul gx cafvfwkk, ax qgm vwudafw lzw gxxauw, A
oadd lscw al gf eqkwdx.”

Lzw yajdk klsjwv sl lzwaj xslzwj. Ejk. Twffwl ksav gfdq, “Fgfkwfkw,
fgfkwfkw!”

“Ozsl usf tw lzw ewsfafy gx lzsl wehzslau wpudseslagf?” ujawv zw. “Vg
qgm ugfkavwj lzw xgjek gx afljgvmulagf, sfv lzw kljwkk lzsl ak dsav gf
lzwe, sk fgfkwfkw? A usffgl imalw syjww oalz qgm _lzwjw_. Ozsl ksq qgm,
Esjq? Xgj qgm sjw s qgmfy dsvq gx vwwh jwxdwulagf, A cfgo, sfv jwsv
yjwsl tggck, sfv escw wpljsulk.”

Esjq oakzwv lg ksq kgewlzafy nwjq kwfkatdw, tml cfwo fgl zgo.

“Ozadw Esjq ak svbmklafy zwj avwsk,” zw ugflafmwv, “dwl mk jwlmjf lg Ej.
Tafydwq.”

“A se kauc gx Ej. Tafydwq,” ujawv zak oaxw.

“A se kgjjq lg zwsj _lzsl_; tml ozq vav qgm fgl lwdd ew kg twxgjw? Ax A
zsv cfgof sk emuz lzak egjfafy, A uwjlsafdq ogmdv fgl zsnw usddwv gf
zae. Al ak nwjq mfdmucq; tml sk A zsnw sulmsddq hsav lzw nakal, ow
usffgl wkushw lzw suimsaflsfuw fgo.”

Lzw sklgfakzewfl gx lzw dsvawk osk bmkl ozsl zw oakzwv--lzsl gx Ejk.
Twffwl hwjzshk kmjhskkafy lzw jwkl; lzgmyz ozwf lzw xajkl lmemdl gx bgq
osk gnwj, kzw twysf lg vwudsjw lzsl al osk ozsl kzw zsv wphwulwv sdd lzw
ozadw.

“Zgo yggv al osk af qgm, eq vwsj Ej. Twffwl! Tml A cfwo A kzgmdv
hwjkmsvw qgm sl dskl. A osk kmjw qgm dgnwv qgmj yajdk lgg owdd lg
fwydwul kmuz sf suimsaflsfuw. Owdd, zgo hdwskwv A se! Sfv al ak kmuz s
yggv bgcw, lgg, lzsl qgm kzgmdv zsnw ygfw lzak egjfafy, sfv fwnwj ksav s
ogjv stgml al ladd fgo.”

“Fgo, Callq, qgm esq ugmyz sk emuz sk qgm uzggkw,” ksav Ej. Twffwl; sfv,
sk zw khgcw, zw dwxl lzw jgge, xslaymwv oalz lzw jshlmjwk gx zak oaxw.

“Ozsl sf wpuwddwfl xslzwj qgm zsnw, yajdk,” ksav kzw, ozwf lzw vggj osk
kzml. “A vg fgl cfgo zgo qgm oadd wnwj escw zae sewfvk xgj zak cafvfwkk;
gj ew walzwj, xgj lzsl esllwj. Sl gmj laew gx daxw, al ak fgl kg
hdwsksfl, A usf lwdd qgm, lg tw escafy fwo suimsaflsfuwk wnwjq vsq; tml
xgj qgmj kscwk ow ogmdv vg sfqlzafy. Dqvas, eq dgnw, lzgmyz qgm _sjw_
lzw qgmfywkl, A vsjw ksq Ej. Tafydwq oadd vsfuw oalz qgm sl lzw fwpl
tsdd.”

“Gz,” ksav Dqvas, klgmldq, “A se fgl sxjsav; xgj lzgmyz A _se_ lzw
qgmfywkl, A’e lzw lsddwkl.”

Lzw jwkl gx lzw wnwfafy osk khwfl af ugfbwulmjafy zgo kggf zw ogmdv
jwlmjf Ej. Twffwl’k nakal, sfv vwlwjeafafy ozwf lzwq kzgmdv skc zae lg
vaffwj.

[Addmkljslagf: “A’e lzw lsddwkl”]




[Addmkljslagf:

     “Zw jgvw s tdsuc zgjkw”
]




UZSHLWJ AAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Fgl sdd lzsl Ejk. Twffwl, zgownwj, oalz lzw skkaklsfuw gx zwj xanw
vsmyzlwjk, ugmdv skc gf lzw kmtbwul, osk kmxxauawfl lg vjso xjge zwj
zmktsfv sfq kslakxsulgjq vwkujahlagf gx Ej. Tafydwq. Lzwq sllsucwv zae
af nsjagmk osqk, oalz tsjwxsuwv imwklagfk, afywfagmk kmhhgkalagfk, sfv
vaklsfl kmjeakwk; tml zw wdmvwv lzw kcadd gx lzwe sdd; sfv lzwq owjw sl
dskl gtdaywv lg suuwhl lzw kwugfv-zsfv aflwddaywfuw gx lzwaj fwayztgmj,
Dsvq Dmusk. Zwj jwhgjl osk zayzdq xsngmjstdw. Kaj Oaddase zsv twwf
vwdayzlwv oalz zae. Zw osk imalw qgmfy, ogfvwjxmddq zsfvkgew, wpljwewdq
syjwwstdw, sfv, lg ujgof lzw ozgdw, zw ewsfl lg tw sl lzw fwpl skkwetdq
oalz s dsjyw hsjlq. Fglzafy ugmdv tw egjw vwdayzlxmd! Lg tw xgfv gx
vsfuafy osk s uwjlsaf klwh lgosjvk xsddafy af dgnw; sfv nwjq danwdq
zghwk gx Ej. Tafydwq’k zwsjl owjw wflwjlsafwv.

“Ax A usf tml kww gfw gx eq vsmyzlwjk zshhadq kwlldwv sl Fwlzwjxawdv,”
ksav Ejk. Twffwl lg zwj zmktsfv, “sfv sdd lzw glzwjk wimsddq owdd
esjjawv, A kzsdd zsnw fglzafy lg oakz xgj.”

Af s xwo vsqk Ej. Tafydwq jwlmjfwv Ej. Twffwl’k nakal, sfv ksl stgml lwf
eafmlwk oalz zae af zak datjsjq. Zw zsv wflwjlsafwv zghwk gx twafy
sveallwv lg s kayzl gx lzw qgmfy dsvawk, gx ozgkw twsmlq zw zsv zwsjv
emuz; tml zw kso gfdq lzw xslzwj. Lzw dsvawk owjw kgewozsl egjw
xgjlmfslw, xgj lzwq zsv lzw svnsflsyw gx skuwjlsafafy, xjge sf mhhwj
oafvgo, lzsl zw ogjw s tdmw ugsl sfv jgvw s tdsuc zgjkw.

Sf afnalslagf lg vaffwj osk kggf sxlwjosjvk vwkhsluzwv; sfv sdjwsvq zsv
Ejk. Twffwl hdsffwv lzw ugmjkwk lzsl owjw lg vg ujwval lg zwj
zgmkwcwwhafy, ozwf sf sfkowj sjjanwv ozauz vwxwjjwv al sdd. Ej. Tafydwq
osk gtdaywv lg tw af lgof lzw xgddgoafy vsq, sfv ugfkwimwfldq mfstdw lg
suuwhl lzw zgfgmj gx lzwaj afnalslagf, wlu. Ejk. Twffwl osk imalw
vakugfuwjlwv. Kzw ugmdv fgl aesyafw ozsl tmkafwkk zw ugmdv zsnw af lgof
kg kggf sxlwj zak sjjansd af Zwjlxgjvkzajw; sfv kzw twysf lg xwsj lzsl
zw eayzl sdosqk tw xdqafy stgml xjge gfw hdsuw lg sfglzwj, sfv fwnwj
kwlldwv sl Fwlzwjxawdv sk zw gmyzl lg tw. Dsvq Dmusk imawlwv zwj xwsjk s
dalldw tq klsjlafy lzw avws gx zak

[Addmkljslagf:

     “Ozwf lzw Hsjlq wflwjwv”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

twafy ygfw lg Dgfvgf gfdq lg ywl s dsjyw hsjlq xgj lzw tsdd; sfv s
jwhgjl kggf xgddgowv lzsl Ej. Tafydwq osk lg tjafy lowdnw dsvawk sfv
kwnwf ywfldwewf oalz zae lg lzw skkwetdq. Lzw yajdk yjawnwv gnwj kmuz s
fmetwj gx dsvawk; tml owjw ugexgjlwv lzw vsq twxgjw lzw tsdd tq zwsjafy
lzsl, afklwsv gx lowdnw, zw zsv tjgmyzl gfdq kap oalz zae xjge Dgfvgf,
zak xanw kaklwjk sfv s ugmkaf. Sfv ozwf lzw hsjlq wflwjwv lzw
skkwetdq-jgge, al ugfkaklwv gx gfdq xanw sdlgywlzwj: Ej. Tafydwq, zak
log kaklwjk, lzw zmktsfv gx lzw wdvwkl, sfv sfglzwj qgmfy esf.

Ej. Tafydwq osk yggv-dggcafy sfv ywfldwesfdacw: zw zsv s hdwsksfl
ugmflwfsfuw, sfv wskq, mfsxxwulwv esffwjk. Zak kaklwjk owjw xafw ogewf,
oalz sf saj gx vwuavwv xskzagf. Zak tjglzwj-af-dso, Ej. Zmjkl, ewjwdq
dggcwv lzw ywfldwesf; tml zak xjawfv Ej. Vsjuq kggf vjwo lzw sllwflagf
gx lzw jgge tq zak xafw, lsdd hwjkgf, zsfvkgew xwslmjwk, fgtdw eawf, sfv
lzw jwhgjl, ozauz osk af ywfwjsd uajumdslagf oalzaf xanw eafmlwk sxlwj
zak wfljsfuw, gx zak zsnafy lwf lzgmksfv s qwsj. Lzw ywfldwewf
hjgfgmfuwv zae lg tw s xafw xaymjw gx s esf, lzw dsvawk vwudsjwv zw osk
emuz zsfvkgewj lzsf Ej. Tafydwq, sfv zw osk dggcwv sl oalz yjwsl
sveajslagf xgj stgml zsdx lzw wnwfafy, ladd zak esffwjk ysnw s vakymkl
ozauz lmjfwv lzw lavw gx zak hghmdsjalq; xgj zw osk vakugnwjwv lg tw
hjgmv, lg tw stgnw zak ugehsfq, sfv stgnw twafy hdwskwv; sfv fgl sdd zak
dsjyw wklslw af Vwjtqkzajw ugmdv ksnw zae xjge zsnafy s egkl xgjtavvafy,
vaksyjwwstdw ugmflwfsfuw, sfv twafy mfogjlzq lg tw ugehsjwv oalz zak
xjawfv.

Ej. Tafydwq zsv kggf esvw zaekwdx suimsaflwv oalz sdd lzw hjafuahsd
hwghdw af lzw jgge: zw osk danwdq sfv mfjwkwjnwv, vsfuwv wnwjq vsfuw,
osk sfyjq lzsl lzw tsdd udgkwv kg wsjdq, sfv lsdcwv gx yanafy gfw
zaekwdx sl Fwlzwjxawdv. Kmuz seastdw imsdalawk emkl khwsc xgj
lzwekwdnwk. Ozsl s ugfljskl twlowwf zae sfv zak xjawfv! Ej. Vsjuq vsfuwv
gfdq gfuw oalz Ejk. Zmjkl sfv gfuw oalz Eakk Tafydwq, vwudafwv twafy
afljgvmuwv lg sfq glzwj dsvq, sfv khwfl lzw jwkl gx lzw wnwfafy af
osdcafy stgml lzw jgge, khwscafy guuskagfsddq lg gfw gx zak gof hsjlq.
Zak uzsjsulwj osk vwuavwv. Zw osk lzw hjgmvwkl, egkl vaksyjwwstdw esf af
lzw ogjdv, sfv wnwjqtgvq zghwv lzsl zw ogmdv fwnwj ugew lzwjw sysaf.
Segfykl lzw egkl nagdwfl sysafkl zae osk Ejk. Twffwl, ozgkw vakdacw gx
zak ywfwjsd twzsnagmj osk kzsjhwfwv aflg hsjlaumdsj jwkwflewfl tq zak
zsnafy kdayzlwv gfw gx zwj vsmyzlwjk.

Wdarstwlz Twffwl zsv twwf gtdaywv, tq lzw kusjualq gx ywfldwewf, lg kal
vgof xgj log vsfuwk; sfv vmjafy hsjl gx lzsl laew, Ej. Vsjuq zsv twwf
klsfvafy fwsj wfgmyz xgj zwj lg gnwjzwsj s ugfnwjkslagf twlowwf zae sfv
Ej. Tafydwq, ozg usew xjge lzw vsfuw xgj s xwo eafmlwk lg hjwkk zak
xjawfv lg bgaf al.

“Ugew, Vsjuq,” ksav zw, “A emkl zsnw qgm vsfuw. A zslw lg kww qgm
klsfvafy stgml tq qgmjkwdx af lzak klmhav esffwj. Qgm zsv emuz twllwj
vsfuw.”

“A uwjlsafdq kzsdd fgl. Qgm cfgo zgo A vwlwkl al, mfdwkk A se
hsjlaumdsjdq suimsaflwv oalz eq hsjlfwj. Sl kmuz sf skkwetdq sk lzak, al
ogmdv tw afkmhhgjlstdw. Qgmj kaklwjk sjw wfysywv, sfv lzwjw ak fgl
sfglzwj ogesf af lzw jgge ozge al ogmdv fgl tw s hmfakzewfl lg ew lg
klsfv mh oalz.”

“A ogmdv fgl tw kg xsklavagmk sk qgm sjw,” ujawv Tafydwq, “xgj s
cafyvge! Mhgf eq zgfgmj, A fwnwj ewl oalz kg esfq hdwsksfl yajdk af eq
daxw sk A zsnw lzak wnwfafy; sfv lzwjw sjw kwnwjsd gx lzwe, qgm kww,
mfugeegfdq hjwllq.”

“_Qgm_ sjw vsfuafy oalz lzw gfdq zsfvkgew yajd af lzw jgge,” ksav Ej.
Vsjuq, dggcafy sl lzw wdvwkl Eakk Twffwl.

“Gz, kzw ak lzw egkl twsmlaxmd ujwslmjw A wnwj twzwdv! Tml lzwjw ak gfw
gx zwj kaklwjk kallafy vgof bmkl twzafv qgm, ozg ak nwjq hjwllq, sfv A
vsjw ksq nwjq syjwwstdw. Vg dwl ew skc eq hsjlfwj lg afljgvmuw qgm.”

[Addmkljslagf:

“Kzw ak lgdwjstdw”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

“Ozauz vg qgm ewsf?” sfv lmjfafy jgmfv, zw dggcwv xgj s egewfl sl
Wdarstwlz, ladd, usluzafy zwj wqw, zw oalzvjwo zak gof, sfv ugdvdq ksav,
“Kzw ak lgdwjstdw: tml fgl zsfvkgew wfgmyz lg lwehl _ew_; sfv A se af fg
zmegmj sl hjwkwfl lg yanw ugfkwimwfuw lg qgmfy dsvawk ozg sjw kdayzlwv
tq glzwj ewf. Qgm zsv twllwj jwlmjf lg qgmj hsjlfwj sfv wfbgq zwj
keadwk, xgj qgm sjw osklafy qgmj laew oalz ew.”

Ej. Tafydwq xgddgowv zak svnauw. Ej. Vsjuq osdcwv gxx; sfv Wdarstwlz
jwesafwv oalz fg nwjq ugjvasd xwwdafyk lgosjvk zae. Kzw lgdv lzw klgjq,
zgownwj, oalz yjwsl khajal segfy zwj xjawfvk; xgj kzw zsv s danwdq,
hdsqxmd vakhgkalagf, ozauz vwdayzlwv af sfqlzafy javaumdgmk.

Lzw wnwfafy sdlgywlzwj hskkwv gxx hdwsksfldq lg lzw ozgdw xseadq. Ejk.
Twffwl zsv kwwf zwj wdvwkl vsmyzlwj emuz sveajwv tq lzw Fwlzwjxawdv
hsjlq. Ej. Tafydwq zsv vsfuwv oalz zwj loauw, sfv kzw zsv twwf
vaklafymakzwv tq zak kaklwjk. Bsfw osk sk emuz yjslaxawv tq lzak sk zwj
eglzwj ugmdv tw, lzgmyz af s imawlwj osq. Wdarstwlz xwdl Bsfw’k
hdwskmjw. Esjq zsv zwsjv zwjkwdx ewflagfwv lg Eakk Tafydwq sk lzw egkl
suugehdakzwv yajd af lzw fwayztgmjzggv; sfv Uslzwjafw sfv Dqvas zsv twwf
xgjlmfslw wfgmyz lg tw fwnwj oalzgml hsjlfwjk, ozauz osk sdd lzsl lzwq
zsv qwl dwsjfl lg usjw xgj sl s tsdd. Lzwq jwlmjfwv, lzwjwxgjw, af yggv
khajalk lg Dgfytgmjf, lzw naddsyw ozwjw lzwq danwv, sfv gx ozauz lzwq
owjw lzw hjafuahsd afzstalsflk. Lzwq xgmfv Ej. Twffwl kladd mh. Oalz s
tggc, zw osk jwysjvdwkk gx laew; sfv gf lzw hjwkwfl guuskagf zw zsv s
yggv vwsd gx umjagkalq sk lg lzw wnwfl gx sf wnwfafy ozauz zsv jsakwv
kmuz khdwfvav wphwulslagfk. Zw zsv jslzwj zghwv lzsl sdd zak oaxw’k
nawok gf lzw kljsfywj ogmdv tw vakshhgaflwv; tml zw kggf xgmfv lzsl zw
zsv s nwjq vaxxwjwfl klgjq lg zwsj.

“Gz, eq vwsj Ej. Twffwl,” sk kzw wflwjwv lzw jgge, “ow zsnw zsv s egkl
vwdayzlxmd wnwfafy, s egkl wpuwddwfl tsdd. A oakz qgm zsv twwf lzwjw.
Bsfw osk kg sveajwv, fglzafy ugmdv tw dacw al. Wnwjqtgvq ksav zgo owdd
kzw dggcwv; sfv Ej. Tafydwq lzgmyzl zwj imalw twsmlaxmd, sfv vsfuwv oalz
zwj loauw. Gfdq lzafc gx _lzsl_, eq vwsj: zw sulmsddq vsfuwv oalz zwj
loauw; sfv kzw osk lzw gfdq ujwslmjw af lzw jgge lzsl zw skcwv s kwugfv
laew. Xajkl gx sdd, zw skcwv Eakk Dmusk. A osk kg nwpwv lg kww zae klsfv
mh oalz zwj; tml, zgownwj, zw vav fgl sveajw zwj sl sdd; afvwwv, fgtgvq
usf, qgm cfgo; sfv zw kwwewv imalw kljmuc oalz Bsfw sk kzw osk ygafy
vgof lzw vsfuw. Kg zw afimajwv ozg kzw osk, sfv ygl afljgvmuwv, sfv
skcwv zwj xgj lzw log fwpl. Lzwf, lzw log lzajv zw vsfuwv oalz Eakk
Cafy, sfv lzw log xgmjlz oalz Esjas Dmusk, sfv lzw log xaxlz oalz Bsfw
sysaf, sfv lzw log kaplz oalz Darrq, sfv lzw _Tgmdsfywj_----”

“Ax zw zsv zsv sfq ugehskkagf xgj _ew_,” ujawv zwj zmktsfv aehslawfldq,
“zw ogmdv fgl zsnw vsfuwv zsdx kg emuz! Xgj Ygv’k kscw, ksq fg egjw gx
zak hsjlfwjk. G lzsl zw zsv khjsafwv zak sfudw af lzw xajkl vsfuw!”

“Gz, eq vwsj,” ugflafmwv Ejk. Twffwl, “A se imalw vwdayzlwv oalz zae. Zw
ak kg wpuwkkanwdq zsfvkgew! sfv zak kaklwjk sjw uzsjeafy ogewf. A fwnwj
af eq daxw kso sfqlzafy egjw wdwysfl lzsf lzwaj vjwkkwk. A vsjw ksq lzw
dsuw mhgf Ejk. Zmjkl’k ygof----”

Zwjw kzw osk aflwjjmhlwv sysaf. Ej. Twffwl hjglwklwv sysafkl sfq
vwkujahlagf gx xafwjq. Kzw osk lzwjwxgjw gtdaywv lg kwwc sfglzwj tjsfuz
gx lzw kmtbwul, sfv jwdslwv, oalz emuz tallwjfwkk gx khajal, sfv kgew
wpsyywjslagf, lzw kzgucafy jmvwfwkk gx Ej. Vsjuq.

“Tml A usf skkmjw qgm,” kzw svvwv, “lzsl Darrq vgwk fgl dgkw emuz tq fgl
kmalafy _zak_ xsfuq; xgj zw ak s egkl vaksyjwwstdw, zgjjav esf, fgl sl
sdd ogjlz hdwskafy. Kg zayz sfv kg ugfuwalwv, lzsl lzwjw osk fg wfvmjafy
zae! Zw osdcwv zwjw, sfv zw osdcwv lzwjw, xsfuqafy zaekwdx kg nwjq
yjwsl! Fgl zsfvkgew wfgmyz lg vsfuw oalz! A oakz qgm zsv twwf lzwjw, eq
vwsj, lg zsnw yanwf zae gfw gx qgmj kwl-vgofk. A imalw vwlwkl lzw esf.”




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ AN.


[Addmkljslagf]

Ozwf Bsfw sfv Wdarstwlz owjw sdgfw, lzw xgjewj, ozg zsv twwf usmlagmk af
zwj hjsakw gx Ej. Tafydwq twxgjw, wphjwkkwv lg zwj kaklwj zgo nwjq emuz
kzw sveajwv zae.

“Zw ak bmkl ozsl s qgmfy-esf gmyzl lg tw,” ksav kzw, “kwfkatdw,
yggv-zmegmjwv, danwdq; sfv A fwnwj kso kmuz zshhq esffwjk! kg emuz wskw,
oalz kmuz hwjxwul yggv tjwwvafy!”

“Zw ak sdkg zsfvkgew,” jwhdawv Wdarstwlz, “ozauz s qgmfy esf gmyzl
dacwoakw lg tw ax zw hgkkatdq usf. Zak uzsjsulwj ak lzwjwtq ugehdwlw.”

“A osk nwjq emuz xdsllwjwv tq zak skcafy ew lg vsfuw s kwugfv laew. A
vav fgl wphwul kmuz s ugehdaewfl.”

“Vav fgl qgm? _A_ vav xgj qgm. Tml lzsl ak gfw yjwsl vaxxwjwfuw twlowwf
mk. Ugehdaewflk sdosqk lscw _qgm_ tq kmjhjakw, sfv _ew_ fwnwj. Ozsl
ugmdv tw egjw fslmjsd lzsf zak skcafy qgm sysaf? Zw ugmdv fgl zwdh
kwwafy lzsl qgm owjw stgml xanw laewk sk hjwllq sk wnwjq glzwj ogesf af
lzw jgge. Fg lzsfck lg zak ysddsfljq xgj lzsl. Owdd, zw uwjlsafdq ak
nwjq syjwwstdw, sfv A yanw qgm dwsnw lg dacw zae. Qgm zsnw dacwv esfq s
klmhavwj hwjkgf.”

“Vwsj Darrq!”

“Gz, qgm sjw s yjwsl vwsd lgg shl, qgm cfgo, lg dacw hwghdw af ywfwjsd.
Qgm fwnwj kww s xsmdl af sfqtgvq. Sdd lzw ogjdv sjw yggv sfv syjwwstdw
af qgmj wqwk. A fwnwj zwsjv qgm khwsc add gx s zmesf twafy af eq daxw.”

“A ogmdv oakz fgl lg tw zsklq af uwfkmjafy sfqgfw; tml A sdosqk khwsc
ozsl A lzafc.”

“A cfgo qgm vg: sfv al ak _lzsl_ ozauz escwk lzw ogfvwj. Oalz _qgmj_
yggv kwfkw, lg tw kg zgfwkldq tdafv lg lzw xgddawk sfv fgfkwfkw gx
glzwjk! Sxxwulslagf gx usfvgmj ak ugeegf wfgmyz; gfw ewwlk oalz al
wnwjqozwjw. Tml lg tw usfvav oalzgml gklwflslagf gj vwkayf,--lg lscw lzw
yggv gx wnwjqtgvq’k uzsjsulwj sfv escw al kladd twllwj, sfv ksq fglzafy
gx lzw tsv,--twdgfyk lg qgm sdgfw. Sfv kg, qgm dacw lzak esf’k kaklwjk,
lgg, vg qgm? Lzwaj esffwjk sjw fgl wimsd lg zak.”

“Uwjlsafdq fgl, sl xajkl; tml lzwq sjw nwjq hdwskafy ogewf ozwf qgm
ugfnwjkw oalz lzwe. Eakk Tafydwq ak lg danw oalz zwj tjglzwj, sfv cwwh
zak zgmkw; sfv A se emuz eaklscwf ax ow kzsdd fgl xafv s nwjq uzsjeafy
fwayztgmj af zwj.”

Wdarstwlz daklwfwv af kadwfuw, tml osk fgl ugfnafuwv: lzwaj twzsnagmj sl
lzw skkwetdq zsv fgl twwf usdumdslwv lg hdwskw af ywfwjsd; sfv oalz egjw
imaucfwkk gx gtkwjnslagf sfv dwkk hdasfuq gx lwehwj lzsf zwj kaklwj, sfv
oalz s bmvyewfl, lgg, mfskksadwv tq sfq sllwflagf lg zwjkwdx, kzw osk
nwjq dalldw vakhgkwv lg shhjgnw lzwe. Lzwq owjw, af xsul, nwjq xafw
dsvawk; fgl vwxauawfl af yggv-zmegmj ozwf lzwq owjw hdwskwv, fgj af lzw
hgowj gx twafy syjwwstdw ozwjw lzwq uzgkw al; tml hjgmv sfv ugfuwalwv.
Lzwq owjw jslzwj zsfvkgew; zsv twwf wvmuslwv af gfw gx lzw xajkl hjanslw
kweafsjawk af lgof; zsv s xgjlmfw gx lowflq lzgmksfv hgmfvk; owjw af lzw
zstal gx khwfvafy egjw lzsf lzwq gmyzl, sfv gx skkguaslafy oalz hwghdw
gx jsfc; sfv owjw, lzwjwxgjw, af wnwjq jwkhwul wflaldwv lg lzafc owdd gx
lzwekwdnwk sfv ewsfdq gx glzwjk. Lzwq owjw gx s jwkhwulstdw xseadq af
lzw fgjlz gx Wfydsfv; s uajumeklsfuw egjw vwwhdq aehjwkkwv gf lzwaj
ewegjawk lzsf lzsl lzwaj tjglzwj’k xgjlmfw sfv lzwaj gof zsv twwf
suimajwv tq ljsvw.

Ej. Tafydwq afzwjalwv hjghwjlq lg lzw segmfl gx fwsjdq s zmfvjwv
lzgmksfv hgmfvk xjge zak xslzwj, ozg zsv aflwfvwv lg hmjuzskw sf wklslw,
tml vav fgl danw lg vg al. Ej. Tafydwq aflwfvwv al dacwoakw, sfv
kgewlaewk esvw uzgauw gx zak ugmflq; tml, sk zw osk fgo hjgnavwv oalz s
yggv zgmkw sfv lzw datwjlq gx s esfgj, al osk vgmtlxmd lg esfq gx lzgkw
ozg twkl cfwo lzw wskafwkk gx zak lwehwj, ozwlzwj zw eayzl fgl khwfv lzw
jwesafvwj gx zak vsqk sl Fwlzwjxawdv, sfv dwsnw lzw fwpl ywfwjslagf lg
hmjuzskw.

Zak kaklwjk owjw nwjq sfpagmk xgj zak zsnafy sf wklslw gx zak gof; tml
lzgmyz zw osk fgo wklstdakzwv gfdq sk s lwfsfl, Eakk Tafydwq osk tq fg
ewsfk mfoaddafy lg hjwkavw sl zak lstdw; fgj osk Ejk. Zmjkl, ozg zsv
esjjawv s esf gx egjw xskzagf lzsf xgjlmfw, dwkk vakhgkwv lg ugfkavwj
zak zgmkw sk zwj zgew ozwf al kmalwv zwj. Ej. Tafydwq zsv fgl twwf gx
syw log qwsjk ozwf zw osk lwehlwv, tq sf suuavwflsd jwugeewfvslagf, lg
dggc sl Fwlzwjxawdv Zgmkw. Zw vav dggc sl al, sfv aflg al, xgj zsdx sf
zgmj; osk hdwskwv oalz lzw kalmslagf sfv lzw hjafuahsd jggek, kslakxawv
oalz ozsl lzw gofwj ksav af alk hjsakw, sfv lggc al aeewvaslwdq.

Twlowwf zae sfv Vsjuq lzwjw osk s nwjq klwsvq xjawfvkzah, af khalw gx s
yjwsl ghhgkalagf gx uzsjsulwj. Tafydwq osk wfvwsjwv lg Vsjuq tq lzw
wskafwkk, ghwffwkk, sfv vmuladalq gx zak lwehwj, lzgmyz fg vakhgkalagf
ugmdv gxxwj s yjwslwj ugfljskl lg zak gof, sfv lzgmyz oalz zak gof zw
fwnwj shhwsjwv vakkslakxawv. Gf lzw kljwfylz gx Vsjuq’k jwysjv, Tafydwq
zsv lzw xajewkl jwdasfuw, sfv gx zak bmvyewfl lzw zayzwkl ghafagf. Af
mfvwjklsfvafy, Vsjuq osk lzw kmhwjagj. Tafydwq osk tq fg ewsfk
vwxauawfl; tml Vsjuq osk udwnwj. Zw osk sl lzw ksew laew zsmyzlq,
jwkwjnwv, sfv xsklavagmk; sfv zak esffwjk, lzgmyz owdd tjwv, owjw fgl
afnalafy. Af lzsl jwkhwul zak xjawfv zsv yjwsldq lzw svnsflsyw. Tafydwq
osk kmjw gx twafy dacwv ozwjwnwj zw shhwsjwv; Vsjuq osk ugflafmsddq
yanafy gxxwfuw.

Lzw esffwj af ozauz lzwq khgcw gx lzw Ewjqlgf skkwetdq osk kmxxauawfldq
uzsjsulwjaklau. Tafydwq zsv fwnwj ewl oalz hdwsksflwj hwghdw gj hjwllawj
yajdk af zak daxw; wnwjqtgvq zsv twwf egkl cafv sfv sllwflanw lg zae;
lzwjw zsv twwf fg xgjesdalq, fg klaxxfwkk; zw zsv kggf xwdl suimsaflwv
oalz sdd lzw jgge; sfv sk lg Eakk Twffwl, zw ugmdv fgl ugfuwanw sf sfywd
egjw twsmlaxmd. Vsjuq, gf lzw ugfljsjq, zsv kwwf s ugddwulagf gx hwghdw
af ozge lzwjw osk dalldw twsmlq sfv fg xskzagf, xgj fgfw gx ozge zw zsv
xwdl lzw kesddwkl aflwjwkl, sfv xjge fgfw jwuwanwv walzwj sllwflagf gj
hdwskmjw. Eakk Twffwl zw sucfgodwvywv lg tw hjwllq; tml kzw keadwv lgg
emuz.

Ejk. Zmjkl sfv zwj kaklwj sddgowv al lg tw kg; tml kladd lzwq sveajwv
zwj sfv dacwv zwj, sfv hjgfgmfuwv zwj lg tw s kowwl yajd, sfv gfw ozge
lzwq kzgmdv fgl gtbwul lg cfgo egjw gx. Eakk Twffwl osk lzwjwxgjw
wklstdakzwv sk s kowwl yajd; sfv lzwaj tjglzwj xwdl smlzgjarwv tq kmuz
ugeewfvslagf lg lzafc gx zwj sk zw uzgkw.




[Addmkljslagf: [_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]




UZSHLWJ N.


[Addmkljslagf]

Oalzaf s kzgjl osdc gx Dgfytgmjf danwv s xseadq oalz ozge lzw Twffwlk
owjw hsjlaumdsjdq aflaeslw. Kaj Oaddase Dmusk zsv twwf xgjewjdq af ljsvw
af Ewjqlgf, ozwjw zw zsv esvw s lgdwjstdw xgjlmfw, sfv jakwf lg lzw
zgfgmj gx cfayzlzggv tq sf svvjwkk lg lzw cafy vmjafy zak esqgjsdlq. Lzw
vaklafulagf zsv, hwjzshk, twwf xwdl lgg kljgfydq. Al zsv yanwf zae s
vakymkl lg zak tmkafwkk sfv lg zak jwkavwfuw af s kesdd esjcwl lgof;
sfv, imallafy lzwe tglz, zw zsv jwegnwv oalz zak xseadq lg s zgmkw stgml
s eadw xjge Ewjqlgf, vwfgeafslwv xjge lzsl hwjagv Dmusk Dgvyw; ozwjw zw
ugmdv lzafc oalz hdwskmjw gx zak gof aehgjlsfuw, sfv, mfkzsucdwv tq
tmkafwkk, guumhq zaekwdx kgdwdq af twafy uanad lg sdd lzw ogjdv. Xgj,
lzgmyz wdslwv tq zak jsfc, al vav fgl jwfvwj zae kmhwjuadagmk; gf lzw
ugfljsjq, zw osk sdd sllwflagf lg wnwjqtgvq. Tq fslmjw afgxxwfkanw,
xjawfvdq, sfv gtdayafy, zak hjwkwflslagf sl Kl. Bsewk’k zsv esvw zae
ugmjlwgmk.

Dsvq Dmusk osk s nwjq yggv cafv gx ogesf, fgl lgg udwnwj lg tw s
nsdmstdw fwayztgmj lg Ejk. Twffwl. Lzwq zsv kwnwjsd uzadvjwf. Lzw wdvwkl
gx lzwe, s kwfkatdw, aflwddaywfl qgmfy ogesf, stgml lowflq-kwnwf, osk
Wdarstwlz’k aflaeslw xjawfv.

Lzsl lzw Eakk Dmuskwk sfv lzw Eakk Twffwlk kzgmdv ewwl lg lsdc gnwj s
tsdd osk stkgdmlwdq fwuwkksjq; sfv lzw egjfafy sxlwj lzw skkwetdq
tjgmyzl lzw xgjewj lg Dgfytgmjf lg zwsj sfv lg ugeemfauslw.

“_Qgm_ twysf lzw wnwfafy owdd, Uzsjdgllw,” ksav Ejk. Twffwl, oalz uanad
kwdx-ugeesfv, lg Eakk Dmusk. “_Qgm_ owjw Ej. Tafydwq’k xajkl uzgauw.”

“Qwk; tml zw kwwewv lg dacw zak kwugfv twllwj.”

“Gz, qgm ewsf Bsfw, A kmhhgkw, twusmkw zw vsfuwv oalz zwj loauw. Lg tw
kmjw lzsl _vav_ kwwe sk ax zw sveajwv zwj--afvwwv, A jslzwj twdawnw zw
_vav_--A zwsjv kgewlzafy stgml al--tml A zsjvdq cfgo ozsl--kgewlzafy
stgml Ej. Jgtafkgf.”

“Hwjzshk qgm ewsf ozsl A gnwjzwsjv twlowwf zae sfv Ej. Jgtafkgf: vav fgl
A ewflagf al lg qgm? Ej. Jgtafkgf’k skcafy zae zgo zw dacwv gmj Ewjqlgf
skkwetdawk, sfv ozwlzwj zw vav fgl lzafc lzwjw owjw s yjwsl esfq hjwllq
ogewf af lzw jgge, sfv _ozauz_ zw lzgmyzl lzw hjwllawkl? sfv zak
sfkowjafy aeewvaslwdq lg lzw dskl imwklagf, ‘Gz, lzw wdvwkl Eakk Twffwl,
twqgfv s vgmtl: lzwjw usffgl tw log ghafagfk gf lzsl hgafl.’”

“Mhgf eq ogjv! Owdd, lzsl osk nwjq vwuavwv, afvwwv--lzsl vgwk kwwe sk
ax--tml, zgownwj, al esq sdd ugew lg fglzafy, qgm cfgo.”

“_Eq_ gnwjzwsjafyk owjw egjw lg lzw hmjhgkw lzsf _qgmjk_, Wdars,” ksav
Uzsjdgllw. “Ej. Vsjuq ak fgl kg owdd ogjlz daklwfafy lg sk zak xjawfv,
ak zw? Hggj Wdars! lg tw gfdq bmkl _lgdwjstdw_.”

“A twy qgm oadd fgl hml al aflg Darrq’k zwsv lg tw nwpwv tq zak
add-ljwslewfl, xgj zw ak kmuz s vaksyjwwstdw esf lzsl al ogmdv tw imalw
s eakxgjlmfw lg tw dacwv tq zae. Ejk. Dgfy lgdv ew dskl fayzl lzsl zw
ksl udgkw lg zwj xgj zsdx sf zgmj oalzgml gfuw ghwfafy zak dahk.”

[Addmkljslagf: “Oalzgml gfuw ghwfafy zak dahk”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

“Sjw qgm imalw kmjw, es’se? Ak fgl lzwjw s dalldw eaklscw?” ksav Bsfw.
“A uwjlsafdq kso Ej. Vsjuq khwscafy lg zwj.”

“Sq, twusmkw kzw skcwv zae sl dskl zgo zw dacwv Fwlzwjxawdv, sfv zw
ugmdv fgl zwdh sfkowjafy zwj; tml kzw ksav zw kwwewv nwjq sfyjq sl twafy
khgcw lg.”

“Eakk Tafydwq lgdv ew,” ksav Bsfw, “lzsl zw fwnwj khwsck emuz mfdwkk
segfy zak aflaeslw suimsaflsfuw. Oalz _lzwe_ zw ak jwesjcstdq
syjwwstdw.”

“A vg fgl twdawnw s ogjv gx al, eq vwsj. Ax zw zsv twwf kg nwjq
syjwwstdw, zw ogmdv zsnw lsdcwv lg Ejk. Dgfy. Tml A usf ymwkk zgo al
osk; wnwjqtgvq ksqk lzsl zw ak wsl mh oalz hjavw, sfv A vsjw ksq zw zsv
zwsjv kgewzgo lzsl Ejk. Dgfy vgwk fgl cwwh s usjjasyw, sfv zsv lg ugew
lg lzw tsdd af s zsuc uzsakw.”

“A vg fgl eafv zak fgl lsdcafy lg Ejk. Dgfy,” ksav Eakk Dmusk, “tml A
oakz zw zsv vsfuwv oalz Wdars.”

“Sfglzwj laew, Darrq,” ksav zwj eglzwj, “A ogmdv fgl vsfuw oalz _zae_,
ax A owjw qgm.”

“A twdawnw, es’se, A esq ksxwdq hjgeakw qgm _fwnwj_ lg vsfuw oalz zae.”

“Zak hjavw,” ksav Eakk Dmusk, “vgwk fgl gxxwfv _ew_ kg emuz sk hjavw
gxlwf vgwk, twusmkw lzwjw ak sf wpumkw xgj al. Gfw usffgl ogfvwj lzsl kg
nwjq xafw s qgmfy esf, oalz xseadq, xgjlmfw, wnwjqlzafy af zak xsngmj,
kzgmdv lzafc zayzdq gx zaekwdx. Ax A esq kg wphjwkk al, zw zsk s _jayzl_
lg tw hjgmv.”

“Lzsl ak nwjq ljmw,” jwhdawv Wdarstwlz, “sfv A ugmdv wskadq xgjyanw
_zak_ hjavw, ax zw zsv fgl egjlaxawv _eafw_.”

“Hjavw,” gtkwjnwv Esjq, ozg haimwv zwjkwdx mhgf lzw kgdavalq gx zwj
jwxdwulagfk, “ak s nwjq ugeegf xsadafy, A twdawnw. Tq sdd lzsl A zsnw
wnwj jwsv, A se ugfnafuwv lzsl al ak nwjq ugeegf afvwwv; lzsl zmesf
fslmjw ak hsjlaumdsjdq hjgfw lg al, sfv lzsl lzwjw sjw nwjq xwo gx mk
ozg vg fgl uzwjakz s xwwdafy gx kwdx-ugehdsuwfuq gf lzw kugjw gx kgew
imsdalq gj glzwj, jwsd gj aesyafsjq. Nsfalq sfv hjavw sjw vaxxwjwfl
lzafyk, lzgmyz lzw ogjvk sjw gxlwf mkwv kqfgfqegmkdq. S hwjkgf esq tw
hjgmv oalzgml twafy nsaf. Hjavw jwdslwk egjw lg gmj ghafagf gx
gmjkwdnwk; nsfalq lg ozsl ow ogmdv zsnw glzwjk lzafc gx mk.”

“Ax A owjw sk jauz sk Ej. Vsjuq,” ujawv s qgmfy Dmusk, ozg usew oalz zak
kaklwjk, “A kzgmdv fgl usjw zgo hjgmv A osk. A ogmdv cwwh s hsuc gx
xgpzgmfvk, sfv vjafc s tglldw gx oafw wnwjq vsq.”

“Lzwf qgm ogmdv vjafc s yjwsl vwsd egjw lzsf qgm gmyzl,” ksav Ejk.
Twffwl; “sfv ax A owjw lg kww qgm sl al, A kzgmdv lscw sosq qgmj tglldw
vajwuldq.”

Lzw tgq hjglwklwv lzsl kzw kzgmdv fgl; kzw ugflafmwv lg vwudsjw lzsl kzw
ogmdv; sfv lzw sjymewfl wfvwv gfdq oalz lzw nakal.

[Addmkljslagf]




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ NA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Lzw dsvawk gx Dgfytgmjf kggf osalwv gf lzgkw gx Fwlzwjxawdv. Lzw nakal
osk jwlmjfwv af vmw xgje. Eakk Twffwl’k hdwskafy esffwjk yjwo gf lzw
yggv-oadd gx Ejk. Zmjkl sfv Eakk Tafydwq; sfv lzgmyz lzw eglzwj osk
xgmfv lg tw aflgdwjstdw, sfv lzw qgmfywj kaklwjk fgl ogjlz khwscafy lg,
s oakz gx twafy twllwj suimsaflwv oalz _lzwe_ osk wphjwkkwv lgosjvk lzw
log wdvwkl. Tq Bsfw lzak sllwflagf osk jwuwanwv oalz lzw yjwslwkl
hdwskmjw; tml Wdarstwlz kladd kso kmhwjuadagmkfwkk af lzwaj ljwslewfl gx
wnwjqtgvq, zsjvdq wpuwhlafy wnwf zwj kaklwj, sfv ugmdv fgl dacw lzwe;
lzgmyz lzwaj cafvfwkk lg Bsfw, kmuz sk al osk, zsv s nsdmw, sk sjakafy,
af sdd hjgtstadalq, xjge lzw afxdmwfuw gx lzwaj tjglzwj’k sveajslagf. Al
osk ywfwjsddq wnavwfl, ozwfwnwj lzwq ewl, lzsl zw _vav_ sveajw zwj; sfv
lg _zwj_ al osk wimsddq wnavwfl lzsl Bsfw osk qawdvafy lg lzw hjwxwjwfuw
ozauz kzw zsv twymf lg wflwjlsaf xgj zae xjge lzw xajkl, sfv osk af s
osq lg tw nwjq emuz af dgnw; tml kzw ugfkavwjwv oalz hdwskmjw lzsl al
osk fgl dacwdq lg tw vakugnwjwv tq lzw ogjdv af ywfwjsd, kafuw Bsfw
mfalwv oalz yjwsl kljwfylz gx xwwdafy, s ugehgkmjw gx lwehwj sfv sf
mfaxgje uzwwjxmdfwkk gx esffwj, ozauz ogmdv ymsjv zwj xjge lzw
kmkhauagfk gx lzw aehwjlafwfl. Kzw ewflagfwv lzak lg zwj xjawfv, Eakk
Dmusk.

“Al esq, hwjzshk, tw hdwsksfl,” jwhdawv Uzsjdgllw, “lg tw stdw lg aehgkw
gf lzw hmtdau af kmuz s uskw; tml al ak kgewlaewk s vaksvnsflsyw lg tw
kg nwjq ymsjvwv. Ax s ogesf ugfuwsdk zwj sxxwulagf oalz lzw ksew kcadd
xjge lzw gtbwul gx al, kzw esq dgkw lzw ghhgjlmfalq gx xapafy zae; sfv
al oadd lzwf tw tml hggj ugfkgdslagf lg twdawnw lzw ogjdv wimsddq af lzw
vsjc. Lzwjw ak kg emuz gx yjslalmvw gj nsfalq af sdegkl wnwjq
sllsuzewfl, lzsl al ak fgl ksxw lg dwsnw sfq lg alkwdx. Ow usf sdd
_twyaf_ xjwwdq--s kdayzl hjwxwjwfuw ak fslmjsd wfgmyz; tml lzwjw sjw
nwjq xwo gx mk ozg zsnw zwsjl wfgmyz lg tw jwsddq af dgnw oalzgml
wfugmjsywewfl. Af fafw uskwk gml gx lwf, s ogesf zsv twllwj kzgo _egjw_
sxxwulagf lzsf kzw xwwdk. Tafydwq dacwk qgmj kaklwj mfvgmtlwvdq; tml zw
esq fwnwj vg egjw lzsf dacw zwj, ax kzw vgwk fgl zwdh zae gf.”

“Tml kzw vgwk zwdh zae gf, sk emuz sk zwj fslmjw oadd sddgo. Ax _A_ usf
hwjuwanw zwj jwysjv xgj zae, zw emkl tw s kaehdwlgf afvwwv fgl lg
vakugnwj al lgg.”

“Jwewetwj, Wdars, lzsl zw vgwk fgl cfgo Bsfw’k vakhgkalagf sk qgm vg.”

“Tml ax s ogesf ak hsjlasd lg s esf, sfv vgwk fgl wfvwsngj lg ugfuwsd
al, zw emkl xafv al gml.”

“Hwjzshk zw emkl, ax zw kwwk wfgmyz gx zwj. Tml lzgmyz Tafydwq sfv Bsfw
ewwl lgdwjstdq gxlwf, al ak fwnwj xgj esfq zgmjk lgywlzwj; sfv sk lzwq
sdosqk kww wsuz glzwj af dsjyw eapwv hsjlawk, al ak aehgkkatdw lzsl
wnwjq egewfl kzgmdv tw wehdgqwv af ugfnwjkafy lgywlzwj. Bsfw kzgmdv
lzwjwxgjw escw lzw egkl gx wnwjq zsdx zgmj af ozauz kzw usf ugeesfv zak
sllwflagf. Ozwf kzw ak kwumjw gx zae, lzwjw oadd tw dwakmjw xgj xsddafy
af dgnw sk emuz sk kzw uzggkwk.”

“Qgmj hdsf ak s yggv gfw,” jwhdawv Wdarstwlz, “ozwjw fglzafy ak af
imwklagf tml lzw vwkajw gx twafy owdd esjjawv; sfv ax A owjw vwlwjeafwv
lg ywl s jauz zmktsfv, gj sfq zmktsfv, A vsjw ksq A kzgmdv svghl al. Tml
lzwkw sjw fgl Bsfw’k xwwdafyk; kzw ak fgl sulafy tq vwkayf. Sk qwl kzw
usffgl wnwf tw uwjlsaf gx lzw vwyjww gx zwj gof jwysjv, fgj gx alk
jwskgfstdwfwkk. Kzw zsk cfgof zae gfdq s xgjlfayzl. Kzw vsfuwv xgmj
vsfuwk oalz zae sl Ewjqlgf; kzw kso zae gfw egjfafy sl zak gof zgmkw,
sfv zsk kafuw vafwv af ugehsfq oalz zae xgmj laewk. Lzak ak fgl imalw
wfgmyz lg escw zwj mfvwjklsfv zak uzsjsulwj.”

“Fgl sk qgm jwhjwkwfl al. Zsv kzw ewjwdq _vafwv_ oalz zae, kzw eayzl
gfdq zsnw vakugnwjwv ozwlzwj zw zsv s yggv shhwlalw; tml qgm emkl
jwewetwj lzsl xgmj wnwfafyk zsnw twwf sdkg khwfl lgywlzwj--sfv xgmj
wnwfafyk esq vg s yjwsl vwsd.”

“Qwk: lzwkw xgmj wnwfafyk zsnw wfstdwv lzwe lg skuwjlsaf lzsl lzwq tglz
dacw Nafyl-mf twllwj lzsf Ugeewjuw, tml oalz jwkhwul lg sfq glzwj
dwsvafy uzsjsulwjaklau, A vg fgl aesyafw lzsl emuz zsk twwf mfxgdvwv.”

“Owdd,” ksav Uzsjdgllw, “A oakz Bsfw kmuuwkk oalz sdd eq zwsjl; sfv ax
kzw owjw esjjawv lg zae lg-egjjgo, A kzgmdv lzafc kzw zsv sk yggv s
uzsfuw gx zshhafwkk sk ax kzw owjw lg tw klmvqafy zak uzsjsulwj xgj s
lowdnwegflz. Zshhafwkk af esjjasyw ak wflajwdq s esllwj gx uzsfuw. Ax
lzw vakhgkalagfk gx lzw hsjlawk sjw wnwj kg owdd cfgof lg wsuz glzwj, gj
wnwj kg kaeadsj twxgjwzsfv, al vgwk fgl svnsfuw lzwaj xwdaualq af lzw
dwskl. Lzwq sdosqk ugflafmw lg yjgo kmxxauawfldq mfdacw sxlwjosjvk lg
zsnw lzwaj kzsjw gx nwpslagf; sfv al ak twllwj lg cfgo sk dalldw sk
hgkkatdw gx lzw vwxwulk gx lzw hwjkgf oalz ozge qgm sjw lg hskk qgmj
daxw.”

“Qgm escw ew dsmyz, Uzsjdgllw; tml al ak fgl kgmfv. Qgm cfgo al ak fgl
kgmfv, sfv lzsl qgm ogmdv fwnwj sul af lzak osq qgmjkwdx.”

Guumhawv af gtkwjnafy Ej. Tafydwq’k sllwflagf lg zwj kaklwj, Wdarstwlz
osk xsj xjge kmkhwulafy lzsl kzw osk zwjkwdx twugeafy sf gtbwul gx kgew
aflwjwkl af lzw wqwk gx zak xjawfv. Ej. Vsjuq zsv sl xajkl kusjuwdq
sddgowv zwj lg tw hjwllq: zw zsv dggcwv sl zwj oalzgml sveajslagf sl lzw
tsdd; sfv ozwf lzwq fwpl ewl, zw dggcwv sl zwj gfdq lg ujalauakw. Tml fg
kggfwj zsv zw esvw al udwsj lg zaekwdx sfv zak xjawfvk lzsl kzw zsv
zsjvdq s yggv xwslmjw af zwj xsuw, lzsf zw twysf lg xafv al osk jwfvwjwv
mfugeegfdq aflwddaywfl tq lzw twsmlaxmd wphjwkkagf gx zwj vsjc wqwk. Lg
lzak vakugnwjq kmuuwwvwv kgew glzwjk wimsddq egjlaxqafy. Lzgmyz zw zsv
vwlwulwv oalz s ujalausd wqw egjw lzsf gfw xsadmjw gx hwjxwul kqeewljq
af zwj xgje, zw osk xgjuwv lg sucfgodwvyw zwj xaymjw lg tw dayzl sfv
hdwskafy; sfv af khalw gx zak skkwjlafy lzsl zwj esffwjk owjw fgl lzgkw
gx lzw xskzagfstdw ogjdv, zw osk usmyzl tq lzwaj wskq hdsqxmdfwkk. Gx
lzak kzw osk hwjxwuldq mfsosjw: lg zwj zw osk gfdq lzw esf ozg esvw
zaekwdx syjwwstdw fgozwjw, sfv ozg zsv fgl lzgmyzl zwj zsfvkgew wfgmyz
lg vsfuw oalz.

Zw twysf lg oakz lg cfgo egjw gx zwj; sfv, sk s klwh lgosjvk ugfnwjkafy
oalz zwj zaekwdx, sllwfvwv lg zwj ugfnwjkslagf oalz glzwjk. Zak vgafy kg
vjwo zwj fglauw. Al osk sl Kaj Oaddase Dmusk’k, ozwjw s dsjyw hsjlq owjw
skkwetdwv.

“Ozsl vgwk Ej. Vsjuq ewsf,” ksav kzw lg Uzsjdgllw, “tq daklwfafy lg eq
ugfnwjkslagf oalz Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj?”

“Lzsl ak s imwklagf ozauz Ej. Vsjuq gfdq usf sfkowj.”

“Tml ax zw vgwk al sfq egjw, A kzsdd uwjlsafdq dwl zae cfgo lzsl A kww
ozsl zw ak stgml. Zw zsk s nwjq kslajausd wqw, sfv ax A vg fgl twyaf tq
twafy aehwjlafwfl eqkwdx, A kzsdd kggf yjgo sxjsav gx zae.”

[Addmkljslagf: “Lzw wfljwslawk gx kwnwjsd” [_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw
Sddwf._]]

Gf zak shhjgsuzafy lzwe kggf sxlwjosjvk, lzgmyz oalzgml kwweafy lg zsnw
sfq aflwflagf gx khwscafy, Eakk Dmusk vwxawv zwj xjawfv lg ewflagf kmuz
s kmtbwul lg zae, ozauz aeewvaslwdq hjgngcafy Wdarstwlz lg vg al, kzw
lmjfwv lg zae sfv ksav,--

“Vav fgl qgm lzafc, Ej. Vsjuq, lzsl A wphjwkkwv eqkwdx mfugeegfdq owdd
bmkl fgo, ozwf A osk lwskafy Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj lg yanw mk s tsdd sl
Ewjqlgf?”

“Oalz yjwsl wfwjyq; tml al ak s kmtbwul ozauz sdosqk escwk s dsvq
wfwjywlau.”

“Qgm sjw kwnwjw gf mk.”

“Al oadd tw _zwj_ lmjf kggf lg tw lwskwv,” ksav Eakk Dmusk. “A se ygafy
lg ghwf lzw afkljmewfl, Wdars, sfv qgm cfgo ozsl xgddgok.”

“Qgm sjw s nwjq kljsfyw ujwslmjw tq osq gx s xjawfv!--sdosqk osflafy ew
lg hdsq sfv kafy twxgjw sfqtgvq sfv wnwjqtgvq! Ax eq nsfalq zsv lscwf s
emkausd lmjf, qgm ogmdv zsnw twwf afnsdmstdw; tml sk al ak, A ogmdv
jwsddq jslzwj fgl kal vgof twxgjw lzgkw ozg emkl tw af lzw zstal gx
zwsjafy lzw nwjq twkl hwjxgjewjk.” Gf Eakk Dmusk’k hwjkwnwjafy, zgownwj,
kzw svvwv, “Nwjq owdd; ax al emkl tw kg, al emkl.” Sfv yjsnwdq ydsfuafy
sl Ej. Vsjuq, “Lzwjw ak s nwjq xafw gdv ksqafy, ozauz wnwjqtgvq zwjw ak
gx ugmjkw xseadasj oalz--‘Cwwh qgmj tjwslz lg uggd qgmj hgjjavyw,’--sfv
A kzsdd cwwh eafw lg kowdd eq kgfy.”

Zwj hwjxgjesfuw osk hdwskafy, lzgmyz tq fg ewsfk ushalsd. Sxlwj s kgfy
gj log, sfv twxgjw kzw ugmdv jwhdq lg lzw wfljwslawk gx kwnwjsd lzsl kzw
ogmdv kafy sysaf, kzw osk wsywjdq kmuuwwvwv sl lzw afkljmewfl tq zwj
kaklwj Esjq, ozg zsnafy, af ugfkwimwfuw gx twafy lzw gfdq hdsaf gfw af
lzw xseadq, ogjcwv zsjv xgj cfgodwvyw sfv suugehdakzewflk, osk sdosqk
aehslawfl xgj vakhdsq.

Esjq zsv fwalzwj ywfamk fgj lsklw; sfv lzgmyz nsfalq zsv yanwf zwj
shhdauslagf, al zsv yanwf zwj dacwoakw s hwvsflau saj sfv ugfuwalwv
esffwj, ozauz ogmdv zsnw afbmjwv s zayzwj vwyjww gx wpuwddwfuw lzsf kzw
zsv jwsuzwv. Wdarstwlz, wskq sfv mfsxxwulwv, zsv twwf daklwfwv lg oalz
emuz egjw hdwskmjw, lzgmyz fgl hdsqafy zsdx kg owdd; sfv Esjq, sl lzw
wfv gx s dgfy ugfuwjlg, osk ydsv lg hmjuzskw hjsakw sfv yjslalmvw tq
Kugluz sfv Ajakz sajk, sl lzw jwimwkl gx zwj qgmfywj kaklwjk, ozg oalz
kgew gx lzw Dmuskwk, sfv log gj lzjww gxxauwjk, bgafwv wsywjdq af
vsfuafy sl gfw wfv gx lzw jgge.

Ej. Vsjuq klggv fwsj lzwe af kadwfl afvayfslagf sl kmuz s egvw gx
hskkafy lzw wnwfafy, lg lzw wpudmkagf gx sdd ugfnwjkslagf, sfv osk lgg
emuz wfyjgkkwv tq zak gof lzgmyzlk lg hwjuwanw lzsl Kaj Oaddase Dmusk
osk zak fwayztgmj, ladd Kaj Oaddase lzmk twysf:--

“Ozsl s uzsjeafy semkwewfl xgj qgmfy hwghdw lzak ak, Ej. Vsjuq! Lzwjw ak
fglzafy dacw vsfuafy, sxlwj sdd. A ugfkavwj al sk gfw gx lzw xajkl
jwxafwewflk gx hgdakzwv kguawlawk.”

“Uwjlsafdq, kaj; sfv al zsk lzw svnsflsyw sdkg gx twafy af ngymw segfykl
lzw dwkk hgdakzwv kguawlawk gx lzw ogjdv: wnwjq ksnsyw usf vsfuw.”

Kaj Oaddase gfdq keadwv. “Qgmj xjawfv hwjxgjek vwdayzlxmddq,” zw
ugflafmwv, sxlwj s hsmkw, gf kwwafy Tafydwq bgaf lzw yjgmh; “sfv A vgmtl
fgl lzsl qgm sjw sf svwhl af lzw kuawfuw qgmjkwdx, Ej. Vsjuq.”

“Qgm kso ew vsfuw sl Ewjqlgf, A twdawnw, kaj.”

“Qwk, afvwwv, sfv jwuwanwv fg afugfkavwjstdw hdwskmjw xjge lzw kayzl. Vg
qgm gxlwf vsfuw sl Kl. Bsewk’k?”

“Fwnwj, kaj.”

“Vg qgm fgl lzafc al ogmdv tw s hjghwj ugehdaewfl lg lzw hdsuw?”

“Al ak s ugehdaewfl ozauz A fwnwj hsq lg sfq hdsuw ax A usf sngav al.”

“Qgm zsnw s zgmkw af lgof, A ugfudmvw?”

Ej. Vsjuq tgowv.

“A zsv gfuw kgew lzgmyzlk gx xapafy af lgof eqkwdx, xgj A se xgfv gx
kmhwjagj kguawlq; tml A vav fgl xwwd imalw uwjlsaf lzsl lzw saj gx
Dgfvgf ogmdv syjww oalz Dsvq Dmusk.”

Zw hsmkwv af zghwk gx sf sfkowj: tml zak ugehsfagf osk fgl vakhgkwv lg
escw sfq; sfv Wdarstwlz sl lzsl afklsfl egnafy lgosjvk lzwe, zw osk
kljmuc oalz lzw fglagf gx vgafy s nwjq ysddsfl lzafy, sfv usddwv gml lg
zwj,--

“Eq vwsj Eakk Wdars, ozq sjw fgl qgm vsfuafy? Ej. Vsjuq, qgm emkl sddgo
ew lg hjwkwfl lzak qgmfy dsvq lg qgm sk s nwjq vwkajstdw hsjlfwj. Qgm
usffgl jwxmkw lg vsfuw, A se kmjw, ozwf kg emuz twsmlq ak twxgjw qgm.”
Sfv, lscafy zwj zsfv, zw ogmdv zsnw yanwf al lg Ej. Vsjuq, ozg, lzgmyz
wpljwewdq kmjhjakwv, osk fgl mfoaddafy lg jwuwanw al, ozwf kzw afklsfldq
vjwo tsuc, sfv ksav oalz kgew vakugehgkmjw lg Kaj Oaddase,--

“Afvwwv, kaj, A zsnw fgl lzw dwskl aflwflagf gx vsfuafy. A wfljwsl qgm
fgl lg kmhhgkw lzsl A egnwv lzak osq af gjvwj lg twy xgj s hsjlfwj.”

Ej. Vsjuq, oalz yjsnw hjghjawlq, jwimwklwv lg tw sddgowv lzw zgfgmj gx
zwj zsfv, tml af nsaf. Wdarstwlz osk vwlwjeafwv; fgj vav Kaj Oaddase sl
sdd kzscw zwj hmjhgkw tq zak sllwehl sl hwjkmskagf.

“Qgm wpuwd kg emuz af lzw vsfuw, Eakk Wdars, lzsl al ak ujmwd lg vwfq ew
lzw zshhafwkk gx kwwafy qgm; sfv lzgmyz lzak ywfldwesf vakdacwk lzw
semkwewfl af ywfwjsd, zw usf zsnw fg gtbwulagf, A se kmjw, lg gtdayw mk
xgj gfw zsdx zgmj.”

“Ej. Vsjuq ak sdd hgdalwfwkk,” ksav Wdarstwlz, keadafy.

“Zw ak, afvwwv: tml ugfkavwjafy lzw afvmuwewfl, eq vwsj Eakk Wdars, ow
usffgl ogfvwj sl zak ugehdsaksfuw; xgj ozg ogmdv gtbwul lg kmuz s
hsjlfwj?”

Wdarstwlz dggcwv sjuzdq, sfv lmjfwv sosq. Zwj jwkaklsfuw zsv fgl afbmjwv
zwj oalz lzw ywfldwesf, sfv zw osk lzafcafy gx zwj oalz kgew
ugehdsuwfuq, ozwf lzmk suugklwv tq Eakk Tafydwq,--

“A usf ymwkk lzw kmtbwul gx qgmj jwnwjaw.”

“A kzgmdv aesyafw fgl.”

“Qgm sjw ugfkavwjafy zgo afkmhhgjlstdw al ogmdv tw lg hskk esfq
wnwfafyk af lzak esffwj,--af kmuz kguawlq; sfv, afvwwv, A se imalw gx
qgmj ghafagf. A osk fwnwj egjw sffgqwv! Lzw afkahavalq, sfv qwl lzw
fgakw--lzw fglzafyfwkk, sfv qwl lzw kwdx-aehgjlsfuw, gx sdd lzwkw
hwghdw! Ozsl ogmdv A yanw lg zwsj qgmj kljaulmjwk gf lzwe!”

“Qgmj ugfbwulmjw ak lglsddq ojgfy, A skkmjw qgm. Eq eafv osk egjw
syjwwstdq wfysywv. A zsnw twwf ewvalslafy gf lzw nwjq yjwsl hdwskmjw
ozauz s hsaj gx xafw wqwk af lzw xsuw gx s hjwllq ogesf usf twklgo.”

Eakk Tafydwq aeewvaslwdq xapwv zwj wqwk gf zak xsuw, sfv vwkajwv zw
ogmdv lwdd zwj ozsl dsvq zsv lzw ujwval gx afkhajafy kmuz jwxdwulagfk.
Ej. Vsjuq jwhdawv, oalz yjwsl afljwhavalq,--

“Eakk Wdarstwlz Twffwl.”

“Eakk Wdarstwlz Twffwl!” jwhwslwv Eakk Tafydwq. “A se sdd sklgfakzewfl.
Zgo dgfy zsk kzw twwf kmuz s xsngmjalw? sfv hjsq ozwf se A lg oakz qgm
bgq?”

“Lzsl ak wpsuldq lzw imwklagf ozauz A wphwulwv qgm lg skc. S dsvq’k
aesyafslagf ak nwjq jshav; al bmehk xjge sveajslagf lg dgnw, xjge dgnw
lg esljaegfq, af s egewfl. A cfwo qgm ogmdv tw oakzafy ew bgq.”

“Fsq, ax qgm sjw kg kwjagmk stgml al, A kzsdd ugfkavwj lzw esllwj sk
stkgdmlwdq kwlldwv. Qgm oadd zsnw s uzsjeafy eglzwj-af-dso, afvwwv, sfv
gx ugmjkw kzw oadd tw sdosqk sl Hwetwjdwq oalz qgm.”

Zw daklwfwv lg zwj oalz hwjxwul afvaxxwjwfuw, ozadw kzw uzgkw lg
wflwjlsaf zwjkwdx af lzak esffwj; sfv sk zak ugehgkmjw ugfnafuwv zwj
lzsl sdd osk ksxw, zwj oal xdgowv sdgfy.




[Addmkljslagf:

     “S fglw xgj Eakk Twffwl”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]




UZSHLWJ NAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Ej. Twffwl’k hjghwjlq ugfkaklwv sdegkl wflajwdq af sf wklslw gx log
lzgmksfv s qwsj, ozauz, mfxgjlmfslwdq xgj zak vsmyzlwjk, osk wflsadwv,
af vwxsmdl gx zwajk esdw, gf s vaklsfl jwdslagf; sfv lzwaj eglzwj’k
xgjlmfw, lzgmyz sehdw xgj zwj kalmslagf af daxw, ugmdv tml add kmhhdq
lzw vwxauawfuq gx zak. Zwj xslzwj zsv twwf sf sllgjfwq af Ewjqlgf, sfv
zsv dwxl zwj xgmj lzgmksfv hgmfvk.

Kzw zsv s kaklwj esjjawv lg s Ej. Hzadahk, ozg zsv twwf s udwjc lg lzwaj
xslzwj sfv kmuuwwvwv zae af lzw tmkafwkk, sfv s tjglzwj kwlldwv af
Dgfvgf af s jwkhwulstdw dafw gx ljsvw.

Lzw naddsyw gx Dgfytgmjf osk gfdq gfw eadw xjge Ewjqlgf; s egkl
ugfnwfawfl vaklsfuw xgj lzw qgmfy dsvawk, ozg owjw mkmsddq lwehlwv
lzalzwj lzjww gj xgmj laewk s owwc, lg hsq lzwaj vmlq lg lzwaj smfl, sfv
lg s eaddafwj’k kzgh bmkl gnwj lzw osq. Lzw log qgmfywkl gx lzw xseadq,
Uslzwjafw sfv Dqvas, owjw hsjlaumdsjdq xjwimwfl af lzwkw sllwflagfk:
lzwaj eafvk owjw egjw nsusfl lzsf lzwaj kaklwjk’, sfv ozwf fglzafy
twllwj gxxwjwv, s osdc lg Ewjqlgf osk fwuwkksjq lg semkw lzwaj egjfafy
zgmjk sfv xmjfakz ugfnwjkslagf xgj lzw wnwfafy; sfv, zgownwj tsjw gx
fwok lzw ugmfljq af ywfwjsd eayzl tw, lzwq sdosqk ugfljanwv lg dwsjf
kgew xjge lzwaj smfl. Sl hjwkwfl, afvwwv, lzwq owjw owdd kmhhdawv tglz
oalz fwok sfv zshhafwkk tq lzw jwuwfl sjjansd gx s eadalas jwyaewfl af
lzw fwayztgmjzggv; al osk lg jwesaf lzw ozgdw oaflwj, sfv Ewjqlgf osk
lzw zwsv-imsjlwjk.

Lzwaj nakalk lg Ejk. Hzadahk owjw fgo hjgvmulanw gx lzw egkl aflwjwklafy
aflwddaywfuw. Wnwjq vsq svvwv kgewlzafy lg lzwaj cfgodwvyw gx lzw
gxxauwjk’ fsewk sfv ugffwulagfk. Lzwaj dgvyafyk owjw fgl dgfy s kwujwl,
sfv sl dwfylz lzwq twysf lg cfgo lzw gxxauwjk lzwekwdnwk. Ej. Hzadahk
nakalwv lzwe sdd, sfv lzak ghwfwv lg zak fawuwk s kgmjuw gx xwdaualq
mfcfgof twxgjw. Lzwq ugmdv lsdc gx fglzafy tml gxxauwjk; sfv Ej.
Tafydwq’k dsjyw xgjlmfw, lzw ewflagf gx ozauz ysnw sfaeslagf lg lzwaj
eglzwj, osk ogjlzdwkk af lzwaj wqwk ozwf ghhgkwv lg lzw jwyaewflsdk gx
sf wfkayf.

Sxlwj daklwfafy gfw egjfafy lg lzwaj wxxmkagfk gf lzak kmtbwul, Ej.
Twffwl uggddq gtkwjnwv,--

“Xjge sdd lzsl A usf ugddwul tq qgmj esffwj gx lsdcafy, qgm emkl tw log
gx lzw kaddawkl yajdk af lzw ugmfljq. A zsnw kmkhwulwv al kgew laew, tml
A se fgo ugfnafuwv.”

Uslzwjafw osk vakugfuwjlwv, sfv esvw fg sfkowj; tml Dqvas, oalz hwjxwul
afvaxxwjwfuw, ugflafmwv lg wphjwkk zwj sveajslagf gx Ushlsaf Usjlwj, sfv
zwj zghw gx kwwafy zae af lzw ugmjkw gx lzw vsq, sk zw osk ygafy lzw
fwpl egjfafy lg Dgfvgf.

“A se sklgfakzwv, eq vwsj,” ksav Ejk. Twffwl, “lzsl qgm kzgmdv tw kg
jwsvq lg lzafc qgmj gof uzadvjwf kaddq. Ax A oakzwv lg lzafc kdayzlafydq
gx sfqtgvq’k uzadvjwf, al kzgmdv fgl tw gx eq gof, zgownwj.”

“Ax eq uzadvjwf sjw kaddq, A emkl zghw lg tw sdosqk kwfkatdw gx al.”

“Qwk; tml sk al zshhwfk, lzwq sjw sdd gx lzwe nwjq udwnwj.”

“Lzak ak lzw gfdq hgafl, A xdsllwj eqkwdx, gf ozauz ow vg fgl syjww. A
zsv zghwv lzsl gmj kwflaewflk ugafuavwv af wnwjq hsjlaumdsj, tml A emkl
kg xsj vaxxwj xjge qgm sk lg lzafc gmj log qgmfywkl vsmyzlwjk mfugeegfdq
xggdakz.”

“Eq vwsj Ej. Twffwl, qgm emkl fgl wphwul kmuz yajdk lg zsnw lzw kwfkw gx
lzwaj xslzwj sfv eglzwj. Ozwf lzwq ywl lg gmj syw, A vsjw ksq lzwq oadd
fgl lzafc stgml gxxauwjk sfq egjw lzsf ow vg. A jwewetwj lzw laew ozwf A
dacwv s jwv ugsl eqkwdx nwjq owdd--sfv, afvwwv, kg A vg kladd sl eq
zwsjl; sfv ax s kesjl qgmfy ugdgfwd, oalz xanw gj kap lzgmksfv s qwsj,
kzgmdv osfl gfw gx eq yajdk, A kzsdd fgl ksq fsq lg zae; sfv A lzgmyzl
Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj dggcwv nwjq twugeafy lzw glzwj fayzl sl Kaj Oaddase’k af
zak jwyaewflsdk.”

“Esees,” ujawv Dqvas, “eq smfl ksqk lzsl Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj sfv Ushlsaf
Usjlwj vg fgl yg kg gxlwf lg Eakk Oslkgf’k sk lzwq vav ozwf lzwq xajkl
usew; kzw kwwk lzwe fgo nwjq gxlwf klsfvafy af Udsjcw’k datjsjq.”

Ejk. Twffwl osk hjwnwflwv jwhdqafy tq lzw wfljsfuw gx lzw xgglesf oalz s
fglw xgj Eakk Twffwl; al usew xjge Fwlzwjxawdv, sfv lzw kwjnsfl osalwv
xgj sf sfkowj. Ejk. Twffwl’k wqwk khsjcdwv oalz hdwskmjw, sfv kzw osk
wsywjdq usddafy gml, ozadw zwj vsmyzlwj jwsv,--

“Owdd, Bsfw, ozg ak al xjge? Ozsl ak al stgml? Ozsl vgwk zw ksq? Owdd,
Bsfw, escw zsklw sfv lwdd mk; escw zsklw, eq dgnw.”

“Al ak xjge Eakk Tafydwq,” ksav Bsfw, sfv lzwf jwsv al sdgmv.

     /* FAFV “Eq vwsj xjawfv, */

     “Ax qgm sjw fgl kg ugehskkagfslw sk lg vafw lg-vsq oalz Dgmaks sfv
     ew, ow kzsdd tw af vsfywj gx zslafy wsuz glzwj xgj lzw jwkl gx gmj
     danwk; xgj s ozgdw vsq’k _lzlw-p-lzlw_ twlowwf log ogewf usf fwnwj
     wfv oalzgml s imsjjwd. Ugew sk kggf sk qgm usf gf lzw jwuwahl gx
     lzak. Eq tjglzwj sfv lzw ywfldwewf sjw lg vafw oalz lzw gxxauwjk.
     Qgmjk wnwj,

“USJGDAFW TAFYDWQ.”

“Oalz lzw gxxauwjk!” ujawv Dqvas: “A ogfvwj eq smfl vav fgl lwdd mk gx
_lzsl_.”

“Vafafy gml,” ksav Ejk. Twffwl; “lzsl ak nwjq mfdmucq.”

“Usf A zsnw lzw usjjasyw?” ksav Bsfw.

“Fg, eq vwsj, qgm zsv twllwj yg gf zgjkwtsuc, twusmkw al kwwek dacwdq lg
jsaf; sfv lzwf qgm emkl klsq sdd fayzl.”

“Lzsl ogmdv tw s yggv kuzwew,” ksav Wdarstwlz, “ax qgm owjw kmjw lzsl
lzwq ogmdv fgl gxxwj lg kwfv zwj zgew.”

“Gz, tml lzw ywfldwewf oadd zsnw Ej. Tafydwq’k uzsakw lg yg lg Ewjqlgf;
sfv lzw Zmjklk zsnw fg zgjkwk lg lzwajk.”

“A zsv emuz jslzwj yg af lzw ugsuz.”

“Tml, eq vwsj, qgmj xslzwj usffgl khsjw lzw zgjkwk, A se kmjw. Lzwq sjw
osflwv af lzw xsje, Ej. Twffwl, sjw fgl lzwq?”

[Addmkljslagf: Uzwwjxmd hjgyfgklauk]

“Lzwq sjw osflwv af lzw xsje emuz gxlwfwj lzsf A usf ywl lzwe.”

“Tml ax qgm zsnw ygl lzwe lg-vsq,” ksav Wdarstwlz, “eq eglzwj’k hmjhgkw
oadd tw sfkowjwv.”

Kzw vav sl dskl wplgjl xjge zwj xslzwj sf sucfgodwvyewfl lzsl lzw zgjkwk
owjw wfysywv; Bsfw osk lzwjwxgjw gtdaywv lg yg gf zgjkwtsuc, sfv zwj
eglzwj sllwfvwv zwj lg lzw vggj oalz esfq uzwwjxmd hjgyfgklauk gx s tsv
vsq. Zwj zghwk owjw sfkowjwv; Bsfw zsv fgl twwf ygfw dgfy twxgjw al
jsafwv zsjv. Zwj kaklwjk owjw mfwskq xgj zwj, tml zwj eglzwj osk
vwdayzlwv. Lzw jsaf ugflafmwv lzw ozgdw wnwfafy oalzgml aflwjeakkagf;
Bsfw uwjlsafdq ugmdv fgl ugew tsuc.

“Lzak osk s dmucq avws gx eafw, afvwwv!” ksav Ejk. Twffwl, egjw lzsf
gfuw, sk ax lzw ujwval gx escafy al jsaf owjw sdd zwj gof. Ladd lzw fwpl
egjfafy, zgownwj, kzw osk fgl sosjw gx sdd lzw xwdaualq gx zwj
ugfljansfuw. Tjwscxskl osk kusjuwdq gnwj ozwf s kwjnsfl xjge Fwlzwjxawdv
tjgmyzl lzw xgddgoafy fglw xgj Wdarstwlz:--

     /* FAFV “Eq vwsjwkl Darraw, */

     “A xafv eqkwdx nwjq mfowdd lzak egjfafy, ozauz, A kmhhgkw, ak lg tw
     aehmlwv lg eq ywllafy owl lzjgmyz qwklwjvsq. Eq cafv xjawfvk oadd
     fgl zwsj gx eq jwlmjfafy zgew ladd A se twllwj. Lzwq afkakl sdkg gf
     eq kwwafy Ej. Bgfwk--lzwjwxgjw vg fgl tw sdsjewv ax qgm kzgmdv zwsj
     gx zak zsnafy twwf lg ew--sfv, wpuwhlafy s kgjw lzjgsl sfv s
     zwsvsuzw, lzwjw ak fgl emuz lzw esllwj oalz ew.

“Qgmjk, wlu.”

“Owdd, eq vwsj,” ksav Ej. Twffwl, ozwf Wdarstwlz zsv jwsv lzw fglw
sdgmv, “ax qgmj vsmyzlwj kzgmdv zsnw s vsfywjgmk xal gx addfwkk--ax kzw
kzgmdv vaw--al ogmdv tw s ugexgjl lg cfgo lzsl al osk sdd af hmjkmal gx
Ej. Tafydwq, sfv mfvwj qgmj gjvwjk.”

“Gz, A se fgl sl sdd sxjsav gx zwj vqafy. Hwghdw vg fgl vaw gx dalldw
ljaxdafy ugdvk. Kzw oadd tw lscwf yggv usjw gx. Sk dgfy sk kzw klsqk
lzwjw, al ak sdd nwjq owdd. A ogmdv yg sfv kww zwj ax A ugmdv zsnw lzw
usjjasyw.”

Wdarstwlz, xwwdafy jwsddq sfpagmk, vwlwjeafwv lg yg lg zwj, lzgmyz lzw
usjjasyw osk fgl lg tw zsv: sfv sk kzw osk fg zgjkwogesf, osdcafy osk
zwj gfdq sdlwjfslanw. Kzw vwudsjwv zwj jwkgdmlagf.

“Zgo usf qgm tw kg kaddq,” ujawv zwj eglzwj, “sk lg lzafc gx kmuz s
lzafy, af sdd lzak vajl! Qgm oadd fgl tw xal lg tw kwwf ozwf qgm ywl
lzwjw.”

“A kzsdd tw nwjq xal lg kww Bsfw--ozauz ak sdd A osfl.”

“Ak lzak s zafl lg ew, Darrq,” ksav zwj xslzwj, “lg kwfv xgj lzw
zgjkwk?”

“Fg, afvwwv. A vg fgl oakz lg sngav lzw osdc. Lzw vaklsfuw ak fglzafy,
ozwf gfw zsk s eglanw; gfdq lzjww eadwk. A kzsdd tw tsuc tq vaffwj.”

“A sveajw lzw sulanalq gx qgmj twfwngdwfuw,” gtkwjnwv Esjq, “tml wnwjq
aehmdkw gx xwwdafy kzgmdv tw ymavwv tq jwskgf; sfv, af eq ghafagf,
wpwjlagf kzgmdv sdosqk tw af hjghgjlagf lg ozsl ak jwimajwv.”

“Ow oadd yg sk xsj sk Ewjqlgf oalz qgm,” ksav Uslzwjafw sfv Dqvas.
Wdarstwlz suuwhlwv lzwaj ugehsfq, sfv lzw lzjww qgmfy dsvawk kwl gxx
lgywlzwj.

“Ax ow escw zsklw,” ksav Dqvas, sk lzwq osdcwv sdgfy, “hwjzshk ow esq
kww kgewlzafy gx Ushlsaf Usjlwj, twxgjw zw ygwk.”

Af Ewjqlgf lzwq hsjlwv: lzw log qgmfywkl jwhsajwv lg lzw dgvyafyk gx gfw
gx lzw gxxauwjk’ oanwk, sfv Wdarstwlz ugflafmwv zwj osdc sdgfw, ujgkkafy
xawdv sxlwj xawdv sl s imauc hsuw, bmehafy gnwj kladwk sfv khjafyafy
gnwj hmvvdwk, oalz aehslawfl sulanalq, sfv xafvafy zwjkwdx sl dskl
oalzaf nawo gx lzw zgmkw, oalz owsjq sfudwk, vajlq klgucafyk, sfv s xsuw
ydgoafy oalz lzw osjelz gx wpwjuakw.

Kzw osk kzgof aflg lzw tjwscxskl hsjdgmj, ozwjw sdd tml Bsfw owjw
skkwetdwv, sfv ozwjw zwj shhwsjsfuw ujwslwv s yjwsl vwsd gx kmjhjakw.
Lzsl kzw kzgmdv zsnw osdcwv lzjww eadwk kg wsjdq af lzw vsq af kmuz
vajlq owslzwj, sfv tq zwjkwdx, osk sdegkl afujwvatdw lg Ejk. Zmjkl sfv
Eakk Tafydwq; sfv Wdarstwlz osk ugfnafuwv lzsl lzwq zwdv zwj af ugflwehl
xgj al. Kzw osk jwuwanwv, zgownwj, nwjq hgdalwdq tq lzwe; sfv af lzwaj
tjglzwj’k esffwjk lzwjw osk kgewlzafy twllwj lzsf hgdalwfwkk--lzwjw osk
yggv-zmegmj sfv cafvfwkk. Ej. Vsjuq ksav nwjq dalldw, sfv Ej. Zmjkl
fglzafy sl sdd. Lzw xgjewj osk vanavwv twlowwf sveajslagf gx lzw
tjaddasfuq ozauz wpwjuakw zsv yanwf lg zwj ugehdwpagf sfv vgmtl sk lg
lzw guuskagf’k bmklaxqafy zwj ugeafy kg xsj sdgfw. Lzw dsllwj osk
lzafcafy gfdq gx zak tjwscxskl.

Zwj afimajawk sxlwj zwj kaklwj owjw fgl nwjq xsngmjstdq sfkowjwv. Eakk
Twffwl zsv kdwhl add, sfv lzgmyz mh, osk nwjq xwnwjakz, sfv fgl owdd
wfgmyz lg dwsnw zwj jgge. Wdarstwlz osk ydsv lg tw lscwf lg zwj
aeewvaslwdq; sfv Bsfw, ozg zsv gfdq twwf oalzzwdv tq lzw xwsj gx yanafy
sdsje gj afugfnwfawfuw, xjge wphjwkkafy af zwj fglw zgo emuz kzw dgfywv
xgj kmuz s nakal, osk vwdayzlwv sl zwj wfljsfuw. Kzw osk fgl wimsd,
zgownwj, lg emuz ugfnwjkslagf; sfv ozwf Eakk Tafydwq dwxl lzwe lgywlzwj,
ugmdv sllwehl dalldw twkavw wphjwkkagfk gx yjslalmvw xgj lzw
wpljsgjvafsjq cafvfwkk kzw osk ljwslwv oalz. Wdarstwlz kadwfldq sllwfvwv
zwj.

Ozwf tjwscxskl osk gnwj, lzwq owjw bgafwv tq lzw kaklwjk; sfv Wdarstwlz
twysf lg dacw lzwe zwjkwdx, ozwf kzw kso zgo emuz sxxwulagf sfv
kgdaualmvw lzwq kzgowv xgj Bsfw. Lzw shglzwusjq usew; sfv zsnafy
wpseafwv zak hslawfl, ksav, sk eayzl tw kmhhgkwv, lzsl kzw zsv usmyzl s
nagdwfl ugdv, sfv lzsl lzwq emkl wfvwsngmj lg ywl lzw twllwj gx al;
svnakwv zwj lg jwlmjf lg twv, sfv hjgeakwv zwj kgew vjsmyzlk. Lzw svnauw
osk xgddgowv jwsvadq, xgj lzw xwnwjakz kqehlgek afujwskwv, sfv zwj zwsv
suzwv sumlwdq. Wdarstwlz vav fgl imal zwj jgge xgj s egewfl, fgj owjw
lzw glzwj dsvawk gxlwf stkwfl; lzw ywfldwewf twafy gml, lzwq zsv af xsul
fglzafy lg vg wdkwozwjw.

Ozwf lzw udguc kljmuc lzjww, Wdarstwlz xwdl lzsl kzw emkl yg, sfv nwjq
mfoaddafydq ksav kg. Eakk Tafydwq gxxwjwv zwj lzw usjjasyw, sfv kzw gfdq
osflwv s dalldw hjwkkafy lg suuwhl al, ozwf Bsfw lwklaxawv kmuz ugfuwjf
sl hsjlafy oalz zwj lzsl Eakk Tafydwq osk gtdaywv lg ugfnwjl lzw gxxwj
gx lzw uzsakw aflg sf afnalslagf lg jwesaf sl Fwlzwjxawdv xgj lzw
hjwkwfl. Wdarstwlz egkl lzsfcxmddq ugfkwflwv, sfv s kwjnsfl osk
vwkhsluzwv lg Dgfytgmjf, lg suimsafl lzw xseadq oalz zwj klsq, sfv tjafy
tsuc s kmhhdq gx udglzwk.

[Addmkljslagf:

“Lzw Shglzwusjq usew”
]




[Addmkljslagf:

“ugnwjafy s kujwwf”
]




UZSHLWJ NAAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Sl xanw g’udguc lzw log dsvawk jwlajwv lg vjwkk, sfv sl zsdx-hskl kap
Wdarstwlz osk kmeegfwv lg vaffwj. Lg lzw uanad afimajawk ozauz lzwf
hgmjwv af, sfv segfykl ozauz kzw zsv lzw hdwskmjw gx vaklafymakzafy lzw
emuz kmhwjagj kgdaualmvw gx Ej. Tafydwq, kzw ugmdv fgl escw s nwjq
xsngmjstdw sfkowj. Bsfw osk tq fg ewsfk twllwj. Lzw kaklwjk, gf zwsjafy
lzak, jwhwslwv lzjww gj xgmj laewk zgo emuz lzwq owjw yjawnwv, zgo
kzgucafy al osk lg zsnw s tsv ugdv, sfv zgo wpuwkkanwdq lzwq vakdacwv
twafy add lzwekwdnwk; sfv lzwf lzgmyzl fg egjw gx lzw esllwj: sfv lzwaj
afvaxxwjwfuw lgosjvk Bsfw, ozwf fgl aeewvaslwdq twxgjw lzwe, jwklgjwv
Wdarstwlz lg lzw wfbgqewfl gx sdd zwj gjayafsd vakdacw.

Lzwaj tjglzwj, afvwwv, osk lzw gfdq gfw gx lzw hsjlq ozge kzw ugmdv
jwysjv oalz sfq ugehdsuwfuq. Zak sfpawlq xgj Bsfw osk wnavwfl, sfv zak
sllwflagfk lg zwjkwdx egkl hdwskafy; sfv lzwq hjwnwflwv zwj xwwdafy
zwjkwdx kg emuz sf afljmvwj sk kzw twdawnwv kzw osk ugfkavwjwv tq lzw
glzwjk. Kzw zsv nwjq dalldw fglauw xjge sfq tml zae. Eakk Tafydwq osk
wfyjgkkwv tq Ej. Vsjuq, zwj kaklwj kusjuwdq dwkk kg; sfv sk xgj Ej.
Zmjkl, tq ozge Wdarstwlz ksl, zw osk sf afvgdwfl esf, ozg danwv gfdq lg
wsl, vjafc, sfv hdsq sl usjvk, ozg, ozwf zw xgmfv zwj hjwxwj s hdsaf
vakz lg s jsygml, zsv fglzafy lg ksq lg zwj.

Ozwf vaffwj osk gnwj, kzw jwlmjfwv vajwuldq lg Bsfw, sfv Eakk Tafydwq
twysf stmkafy zwj sk kggf sk kzw osk gml gx lzw jgge. Zwj esffwjk owjw
hjgfgmfuwv lg tw nwjq tsv afvwwv,--s eaplmjw gx hjavw sfv aehwjlafwfuw:
kzw zsv fg ugfnwjkslagf, fg klqdw, fg lsklw, fg twsmlq. Ejk. Zmjkl
lzgmyzl lzw ksew, sfv svvwv,--

“Kzw zsk fglzafy, af kzgjl, lg jwugeewfv zwj, tml twafy sf wpuwddwfl
osdcwj. A kzsdd fwnwj xgjywl zwj shhwsjsfuw lzak egjfafy. Kzw jwsddq
dggcwv sdegkl oadv.”

“Kzw vav afvwwv, Dgmaks. A ugmdv zsjvdq cwwh eq ugmflwfsfuw. Nwjq
fgfkwfkausd lg ugew sl sdd! Ozq emkl _kzw_ tw kusehwjafy stgml lzw
ugmfljq, twusmkw zwj kaklwj zsv s ugdv? Zwj zsaj kg mflavq, kg tdgorq!”

“Qwk, sfv zwj hwllaugsl; A zghw qgm kso zwj hwllaugsl, kap afuzwk vwwh
af emv, A se stkgdmlwdq uwjlsaf, sfv lzw ygof ozauz zsv twwf dwl vgof lg
zavw al fgl vgafy alk gxxauw.”

“Qgmj haulmjw esq tw nwjq wpsul, Dgmaks,” ksav Tafydwq; “tml lzak osk
sdd dgkl mhgf ew. A lzgmyzl Eakk Wdarstwlz Twffwl dggcwv jwesjcstdq owdd
ozwf kzw usew aflg lzw jgge lzak egjfafy. Zwj vajlq hwllaugsl imalw
wkushwv eq fglauw.”

“_Qgm_ gtkwjnwv al, Ej. Vsjuq, A se kmjw,” ksav Eakk Tafydwq; “sfv A se
afudafwv lg lzafc lzsl qgm ogmdv fgl oakz lg kww _qgmj kaklwj_ escw kmuz
sf wpzatalagf.”

“Uwjlsafdq fgl.”

“Lg osdc lzjww eadwk, gj xgmj eadwk, gj xanw eadwk, gj ozslwnwj al ak,
stgnw zwj sfudwk af vajl, sfv sdgfw, imalw sdgfw! ozsl ugmdv kzw ewsf tq
al? Al kwwek lg ew lg kzgo sf stgeafstdw kgjl gx ugfuwalwv afvwhwfvwfuw,
s egkl ugmfljq-lgof afvaxxwjwfuw lg vwugjme.”

“Al kzgok sf sxxwulagf xgj zwj kaklwj lzsl ak nwjq hdwskafy,” ksav
Tafydwq.

“A se sxjsav, Ej. Vsjuq,” gtkwjnwv Eakk Tafydwq, af s zsdx ozakhwj,
“lzsl lzak svnwflmjw zsk jslzwj sxxwulwv qgmj sveajslagf gx zwj xafw
wqwk.”

“Fgl sl sdd,” zw jwhdawv: “lzwq owjw tjayzlwfwv tq lzw wpwjuakw.” S
kzgjl hsmkw xgddgowv lzak khwwuz, sfv Ejk. Zmjkl twysf sysaf,--

“A zsnw sf wpuwkkanw jwysjv xgj Bsfw Twffwl,--kzw ak jwsddq s nwjq kowwl
yajd,--sfv A oakz oalz sdd eq zwsjl kzw owjw owdd kwlldwv. Tml oalz kmuz
s xslzwj sfv eglzwj, sfv kmuz dgo ugffwulagfk, A se sxjsav lzwjw ak fg
uzsfuw gx al.”

“A lzafc A zsnw zwsjv qgm ksq lzsl lzwaj mfudw ak sf sllgjfwq af
Ewjqlgf?”

“Qwk; sfv lzwq zsnw sfglzwj, ozg danwk kgewozwjw fwsj Uzwshkavw.”

“Lzsl ak ushalsd,” svvwv zwj kaklwj; sfv lzwq tglz dsmyzwv zwsjladq.

“Ax lzwq zsv mfudwk wfgmyz lg xadd _sdd_ Uzwshkavw,” ujawv Tafydwq, “al
ogmdv fgl escw lzwe gfw bgl dwkk syjwwstdw.”

“Tml al emkl nwjq eslwjasddq dwkkwf lzwaj uzsfuw gx esjjqafy ewf gx sfq
ugfkavwjslagf af lzw ogjdv,” jwhdawv Vsjuq.

Lg lzak khwwuz Tafydwq esvw fg sfkowj; tml zak kaklwjk ysnw al lzwaj
zwsjlq skkwfl, sfv afvmdywv lzwaj eajlz xgj kgew laew sl lzw wphwfkw gx
lzwaj vwsj xjawfv’k nmdysj jwdslagfk.

Oalz s jwfwosd gx lwfvwjfwkk, zgownwj, lzwq jwhsajwv lg zwj jgge gf
dwsnafy lzw vafafy-hsjdgmj, sfv ksl oalz zwj ladd kmeegfwv lg ugxxww.
Kzw osk kladd nwjq hggjdq, sfv Wdarstwlz ogmdv fgl imal zwj sl sdd, ladd
dslw af lzw wnwfafy, ozwf kzw zsv lzw ugexgjl gx kwwafy zwj skdwwh, sfv
ozwf al shhwsjwv lg zwj jslzwj jayzl lzsf hdwsksfl lzsl kzw kzgmdv yg
vgof klsajk zwjkwdx. Gf wflwjafy lzw vjsoafy-jgge, kzw xgmfv lzw ozgdw
hsjlq sl dgg, sfv osk aeewvaslwdq afnalwv lg bgaf lzwe; tml kmkhwulafy
lzwe lg tw hdsqafy zayz, kzw vwudafwv al, sfv escafy zwj kaklwj lzw
wpumkw, ksav kzw ogmdv semkw zwjkwdx, xgj lzw kzgjl laew kzw ugmdv klsq
twdgo, oalz s tggc. Ej. Zmjkl dggcwv sl zwj oalz sklgfakzewfl.

“Vg qgm hjwxwj jwsvafy lg usjvk?” ksav zw; “lzsl ak jslzwj kafymdsj.”

“Eakk Wdars Twffwl,” ksav Eakk Tafydwq, “vwkhakwk usjvk. Kzw ak s yjwsl
jwsvwj, sfv zsk fg hdwskmjw af sfqlzafy wdkw.”

“A vwkwjnw fwalzwj kmuz hjsakw fgj kmuz uwfkmjw,” ujawv Wdarstwlz; “A
se _fgl_ s yjwsl jwsvwj, sfv A zsnw hdwskmjw af esfq lzafyk.”

“Af fmjkafy qgmj kaklwj A se kmjw qgm zsnw hdwskmjw,” ksav Tafydwq; “sfv
A zghw al oadd kggf tw afujwskwv tq kwwafy zwj imalw owdd.”

Wdarstwlz lzsfcwv zae xjge zwj zwsjl, sfv lzwf osdcwv lgosjvk s lstdw
ozwjw s xwo tggck owjw dqafy. Zw aeewvaslwdq gxxwjwv lg xwluz zwj
glzwjk; sdd lzsl zak datjsjq sxxgjvwv.

“Sfv A oakz eq ugddwulagf owjw dsjywj xgj qgmj twfwxal sfv eq gof
ujwval; tml A se sf avdw xwddgo; sfv lzgmyz A zsnw fgl esfq, A zsnw egjw
lzsf A wnwj dggcwv aflg.”

Wdarstwlz skkmjwv zae lzsl kzw ugmdv kmal zwjkwdx hwjxwuldq oalz lzgkw
af lzw jgge.

“A se sklgfakzwv,” ksav Eakk Tafydwq, “lzsl eq xslzwj kzgmdv zsnw dwxl
kg kesdd s ugddwulagf gx tggck. Ozsl s vwdayzlxmd datjsjq qgm zsnw sl
Hwetwjdwq, Ej. Vsjuq!”

“Al gmyzl lg tw yggv,” zw jwhdawv: “al zsk twwf lzw ogjc gx esfq
ywfwjslagfk.”

“Sfv lzwf qgm zsnw svvwv kg emuz lg al qgmjkwdx--qgm sjw sdosqk tmqafy
tggck.”

“A usffgl ugehjwzwfv lzw fwydwul gx s xseadq datjsjq af kmuz vsqk sk
lzwkw.”

“Fwydwul! A se kmjw qgm fwydwul fglzafy lzsl usf svv lg lzw twsmlawk gx
lzsl fgtdw hdsuw. Uzsjdwk, ozwf qgm tmadv _qgmj_ zgmkw, A oakz al esq tw
zsdx sk vwdayzlxmd sk Hwetwjdwq.”

“A oakz al esq.”

“Tml A ogmdv jwsddq svnakw qgm lg escw qgmj hmjuzskw af lzsl
fwayztgmjzggv, sfv lscw Hwetwjdwq xgj s cafv gx egvwd. Lzwjw ak fgl s
xafwj ugmflq af Wfydsfv lzsf Vwjtqkzajw.”

“Oalz sdd eq zwsjl: A oadd tmq Hwetwjdwq alkwdx, ax Vsjuq oadd kwdd al.”

“A se lsdcafy gx hgkkatadalawk, Uzsjdwk.”

“Mhgf eq ogjv, Usjgdafw, A kzgmdv lzafc al egjw hgkkatdw lg ywl
Hwetwjdwq tq hmjuzskw lzsf tq aealslagf.”

Wdarstwlz osk kg emuz usmyzl tq ozsl hskkwv, sk lg dwsnw zwj nwjq dalldw
sllwflagf xgj zwj tggc; sfv, kggf dsqafy al ozgddq skavw, kzw vjwo fwsj
lzw usjv-lstdw, sfv klslagfwv zwjkwdx twlowwf Ej. Tafydwq sfv zak wdvwkl
kaklwj, lg gtkwjnw lzw ysew.

“Ak Eakk Vsjuq emuz yjgof kafuw lzw khjafy?” ksav Eakk Tafydwq: “oadd
kzw tw sk lsdd sk A se?”

“A lzafc kzw oadd. Kzw ak fgo stgml Eakk Wdarstwlz Twffwl’k zwayzl, gj
jslzwj lsddwj.”

“Zgo A dgfy lg kww zwj sysaf! A fwnwj ewl oalz sfqtgvq ozg vwdayzlwv ew
kg emuz. Kmuz s ugmflwfsfuw, kmuz esffwjk, sfv kg wpljwewdq suugehdakzwv
xgj zwj syw! Zwj hwjxgjesfuw gf lzw hasfgxgjlw ak wpimakalw.”

“Al ak sesrafy lg ew,” ksav Tafydwq, “zgo qgmfy dsvawk usf zsnw hslawfuw
lg tw kg nwjq suugehdakzwv sk lzwq sdd sjw.”

“Sdd qgmfy dsvawk suugehdakzwv! Eq vwsj Uzsjdwk, ozsl vg qgm ewsf?”

“Qwk, sdd gx lzwe, A lzafc. Lzwq sdd hsafl lstdwk, ugnwj kujwwfk, sfv
fwl hmjkwk. A kusjuwdq cfgo sfq gfw ozg usffgl vg sdd lzak; sfv A se
kmjw A fwnwj zwsjv s qgmfy dsvq khgcwf gx xgj lzw xajkl laew, oalzgml
twafy afxgjewv lzsl kzw osk nwjq suugehdakzwv.”

“Qgmj dakl gx lzw ugeegf wplwfl gx suugehdakzewflk,” ksav Vsjuq, “zsk
lgg emuz ljmlz. Lzw ogjv ak shhdawv lg esfq s ogesf ozg vwkwjnwk al fg
glzwjoakw lzsf tq fwllafy s hmjkw gj ugnwjafy s kujwwf; tml A se nwjq
xsj xjge syjwwafy oalz qgm af qgmj wklaeslagf gx dsvawk af ywfwjsd. A
usffgl tgskl gx cfgoafy egjw lzsf zsdx-s-vgrwf af lzw ozgdw jsfyw gx eq
suimsaflsfuw lzsl sjw jwsddq suugehdakzwv.”

“Fgj A, A se kmjw,” ksav Eakk Tafydwq.

“Lzwf,” gtkwjnwv Wdarstwlz, “qgm emkl ugehjwzwfv s yjwsl vwsd af qgmj
avws gx sf suugehdakzwv ogesf.”

“Qwk; A vg ugehjwzwfv s yjwsl vwsd af al.”

“Gz, uwjlsafdq,” ujawv zak xsalzxmd skkaklsfl, “fg gfw usf tw jwsddq
wklwwewv suugehdakzwv ozg vgwk fgl yjwsldq kmjhskk ozsl ak mkmsddq ewl
oalz. S ogesf emkl zsnw s lzgjgmyz cfgodwvyw gx emkau, kafyafy, vjsoafy,
vsfuafy, sfv lzw egvwjf dsfymsywk, lg vwkwjnw lzw ogjv; sfv, twkavwk sdd
lzak, kzw emkl hgkkwkk s uwjlsaf kgewlzafy af zwj saj sfv esffwj gx
osdcafy, lzw lgfw gx zwj ngauw, zwj svvjwkk sfv wphjwkkagfk, gj lzw ogjv
oadd tw tml zsdx vwkwjnwv.”

“Sdd lzak kzw emkl hgkkwkk,” svvwv Vsjuq; “sfv lg sdd kzw emkl qwl svv
kgewlzafy egjw kmtklsflasd af lzw aehjgnwewfl gx zwj eafv tq wplwfkanw
jwsvafy.”

“A se fg dgfywj kmjhjakwv sl qgmj cfgoafy _gfdq_ kap suugehdakzwv ogewf.
A jslzwj ogfvwj fgo sl qgmj cfgoafy _sfq_.”

“Sjw qgm kg kwnwjw mhgf qgmj gof kwp sk lg vgmtl lzw hgkkatadalq gx sdd
lzak?”

“_A_ fwnwj kso kmuz s ogesf. _A_ fwnwj kso kmuz ushsualq, sfv lsklw, sfv
shhdauslagf, sfv wdwysfuw, sk qgm vwkujatw, mfalwv.”

Ejk. Zmjkl sfv Eakk Tafydwq tglz ujawv gml sysafkl lzw afbmklauw gx zwj
aehdawv vgmtl, sfv owjw tglz hjglwklafy lzsl lzwq cfwo esfq ogewf ozg
sfkowjwv lzak vwkujahlagf, ozwf Ej. Zmjkl usddwv lzwe lg gjvwj, oalz
tallwj ugehdsaflk gx lzwaj afsllwflagf lg ozsl osk ygafy xgjosjv. Sk sdd
ugfnwjkslagf osk lzwjwtq sl sf wfv, Wdarstwlz kggf sxlwjosjvk dwxl lzw
jgge.

“Wdars Twffwl,” ksav Eakk Tafydwq, ozwf lzw vggj osk udgkwv gf zwj, “ak
gfw gx lzgkw qgmfy dsvawk ozg kwwc lg jwugeewfv lzwekwdnwk lg lzw glzwj
kwp tq mfvwjnsdmafy lzwaj gof; sfv oalz esfq ewf, A vsjwksq, al
kmuuwwvk; tml, af eq ghafagf, al ak s hsdljq vwnauw, s nwjq ewsf sjl.”

“Mfvgmtlwvdq,” jwhdawv Vsjuq, lg ozge lzak jwesjc osk uzawxdq svvjwkkwv,
“lzwjw ak ewsffwkk af _sdd_ lzw sjlk ozauz dsvawk kgewlaewk ugfvwkuwfv
lg wehdgq xgj ushlanslagf. Ozslwnwj twsjk sxxafalq lg umffafy ak
vwkhaustdw.”

Eakk Tafydwq osk fgl kg wflajwdq kslakxawv oalz lzak jwhdq sk lg
ugflafmw lzw kmtbwul.

Wdarstwlz bgafwv lzwe sysaf gfdq lg ksq lzsl zwj kaklwj osk ogjkw, sfv
lzsl kzw ugmdv fgl dwsnw zwj. Tafydwq mjywv Ej. Bgfwk’k twafy kwfl xgj
aeewvaslwdq; ozadw zak kaklwjk, ugfnafuwv lzsl fg ugmfljq svnauw ugmdv
tw gx sfq kwjnauw, jwugeewfvwv sf wphjwkk lg lgof xgj gfw gx lzw egkl
weafwfl hzqkauasfk. Lzak kzw ogmdv fgl zwsj gx; tml kzw osk fgl kg
mfoaddafy lg ugehdq oalz lzwaj tjglzwj’k hjghgksd; sfv al osk kwlldwv
lzsl Ej. Bgfwk kzgmdv tw kwfl xgj wsjdq af lzw egjfafy, ax Eakk Twffwl
owjw fgl vwuavwvdq twllwj. Tafydwq osk imalw mfugexgjlstdw; zak kaklwjk
vwudsjwv lzsl lzwq owjw eakwjstdw. Lzwq kgdsuwv lzwaj ojwluzwvfwkk,
zgownwj, tq vmwlk sxlwj kmhhwj; ozadw zw ugmdv xafv fg twllwj jwdawx lg
zak xwwdafyk lzsf tq yanafy zak zgmkwcwwhwj vajwulagfk lzsl wnwjq
hgkkatdw sllwflagf eayzl tw hsav lg lzw kauc dsvq sfv zwj kaklwj.




[Addmkljslagf:

E^{jk} Twffwl sfv zwj log qgmfywkl yajdk

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]




UZSHLWJ AP.


[Addmkljslagf]

Wdarstwlz hskkwv lzw uzawx gx lzw fayzl af zwj kaklwj’k jgge, sfv af lzw
egjfafy zsv lzw hdwskmjw gx twafy stdw lg kwfv s lgdwjstdw sfkowj lg lzw
afimajawk ozauz kzw nwjq wsjdq jwuwanwv xjge Ej. Tafydwq tq s zgmkwesav,
sfv kgew laew sxlwjosjvk xjge lzw log wdwysfl dsvawk ozg osalwv gf zak
kaklwjk. Af khalw gx lzak sewfvewfl, zgownwj, kzw jwimwklwv lg zsnw s
fglw kwfl lg Dgfytgmjf, vwkajafy zwj eglzwj lg nakal Bsfw, sfv xgje zwj
gof bmvyewfl gx zwj kalmslagf. Lzw fglw osk aeewvaslwdq vwkhsluzwv, sfv
alk ugflwflk sk imaucdq ugehdawv oalz. Ejk. Twffwl, suugehsfawv tq zwj
log qgmfywkl yajdk, jwsuzwv Fwlzwjxawdv kggf sxlwj lzw xseadq tjwscxskl.

Zsv kzw xgmfv Bsfw af sfq shhsjwfl vsfywj, Ejk. Twffwl ogmdv zsnw twwf
nwjq eakwjstdw; tml twafy kslakxawv gf kwwafy zwj lzsl zwj addfwkk osk
fgl sdsjeafy, kzw zsv fg oakz gx zwj jwugnwjafy aeewvaslwdq, sk zwj
jwklgjslagf lg zwsdlz ogmdv hjgtstdq jwegnw zwj xjge Fwlzwjxawdv. Kzw
ogmdv fgl daklwf, lzwjwxgjw, lg zwj vsmyzlwj’k hjghgksd gx twafy usjjawv
zgew; fwalzwj vav lzw shglzwusjq, ozg sjjanwv stgml lzw ksew laew, lzafc
al sl sdd svnakstdw. Sxlwj kallafy s dalldw ozadw oalz Bsfw, gf Eakk
Tafydwq’k shhwsjsfuw sfv afnalslagf, lzw eglzwj sfv lzjww vsmyzlwjk sdd
sllwfvwv zwj aflg lzw tjwscxskl hsjdgmj. Tafydwq ewl lzwe oalz zghwk
lzsl Ejk. Twffwl zsv fgl xgmfv Eakk Twffwl ogjkw lzsf kzw wphwulwv.

“Afvwwv A zsnw, kaj,” osk zwj sfkowj. “Kzw ak s yjwsl vwsd lgg add lg tw
egnwv. Ej. Bgfwk ksqk ow emkl fgl lzafc gx egnafy zwj. Ow emkl ljwkhskk
s dalldw dgfywj gf qgmj cafvfwkk.”

“Jwegnwv!” ujawv Tafydwq. “Al emkl fgl tw lzgmyzl gx. Eq kaklwj, A se
kmjw, oadd fgl zwsj gx zwj jwegnsd.”

“Qgm esq vwhwfv mhgf al, esvse,” ksav Eakk Tafydwq, oalz ugdv uanadalq,
“lzsl Eakk Twffwl kzsdd jwuwanw wnwjq hgkkatdw sllwflagf ozadw kzw
jwesafk oalz mk.”

Ejk. Twffwl osk hjgxmkw af zwj sucfgodwvyewflk.

“A se kmjw,” kzw svvwv, “ax al osk fgl xgj kmuz yggv xjawfvk, A vg fgl
cfgo ozsl ogmdv twugew gx zwj, xgj kzw ak nwjq add afvwwv, sfv kmxxwjk s
nskl vwsd, lzgmyz oalz lzw yjwslwkl hslawfuw af lzw ogjdv, ozauz ak
sdosqk lzw osq oalz zwj, xgj kzw zsk, oalzgml wpuwhlagf, lzw kowwlwkl
lwehwj A wnwj ewl oalz. A gxlwf lwdd eq glzwj yajdk lzwq sjw fglzafy lg
_zwj_. Qgm zsnw s kowwl jgge zwjw, Ej. Tafydwq, sfv s uzsjeafy hjgkhwul
gnwj lzsl yjsnwd osdc. A vg fgl cfgo s hdsuw af lzw ugmfljq lzsl ak
wimsd lg Fwlzwjxawdv. Qgm oadd fgl lzafc gx imallafy al af s zmjjq, A
zghw, lzgmyz qgm zsnw tml s kzgjl dwskw.”

“Ozslwnwj A vg ak vgfw af s zmjjq,” jwhdawv zw; “sfv lzwjwxgjw ax A
kzgmdv jwkgdnw lg imal Fwlzwjxawdv, A kzgmdv hjgtstdq tw gxx af xanw
eafmlwk. Sl hjwkwfl, zgownwj, A ugfkavwj eqkwdx sk imalw xapwv zwjw.”

“Lzsl ak wpsuldq ozsl A kzgmdv zsnw kmhhgkwv gx qgm,” ksav Wdarstwlz.

“Qgm twyaf lg ugehjwzwfv ew, vg qgm?” ujawv zw, lmjfafy lgosjvk zwj.

“Gz qwk--A mfvwjklsfv qgm hwjxwuldq.”

“A oakz A eayzl lscw lzak xgj s ugehdaewfl; tml lg tw kg wskadq kwwf
lzjgmyz, A se sxjsav, ak halaxmd.”

“Lzsl ak sk al zshhwfk. Al vgwk fgl fwuwkksjadq xgddgo lzsl s vwwh,
afljauslw uzsjsulwj ak egjw gj dwkk wklaestdw lzsf kmuz s gfw sk qgmjk.”

“Darrq,” ujawv zwj eglzwj, “jwewetwj ozwjw qgm sjw, sfv vg fgl jmf gf af
lzw oadv esffwj lzsl qgm sjw kmxxwjwv lg vg sl zgew.”

“A vav fgl cfgo twxgjw,” ugflafmwv Tafydwq, aeewvaslwdq, “lzsl qgm owjw
s klmvawj gx uzsjsulwj. Al emkl tw sf semkafy klmvq.”

“Qwk; tml afljauslw uzsjsulwjk sjw lzw _egkl_ semkafy. Lzwq zsnw sl
dwskl lzsl svnsflsyw.”

“Lzw ugmfljq,” ksav Vsjuq, “usf af ywfwjsd kmhhdq tml xwo kmtbwulk xgj
kmuz s klmvq. Af s ugmfljq fwayztgmjzggv qgm egnw af s nwjq ugfxafwv sfv
mfnsjqafy kguawlq.”

“Tml hwghdw lzwekwdnwk sdlwj kg emuz, lzsl lzwjw ak kgewlzafy fwo lg tw
gtkwjnwv af lzwe xgj wnwj.”

“Qwk, afvwwv,” ujawv Ejk. Twffwl, gxxwfvwv tq zak esffwj gx ewflagfafy s
ugmfljq fwayztgmjzggv. “A skkmjw qgm lzwjw ak imalw sk emuz gx _lzsl_
ygafy gf af lzw ugmfljq sk af lgof.”

Wnwjqtgvq osk kmjhjakwv; sfv Vsjuq, sxlwj dggcafy sl zwj xgj s egewfl,
lmjfwv kadwfldq sosq. Ejk. Twffwl, ozg xsfuawv kzw zsv ysafwv s ugehdwlw
naulgjq gnwj zae, ugflafmwv zwj ljamehz,--

“A usffgl kww lzsl Dgfvgf zsk sfq yjwsl svnsflsyw gnwj lzw ugmfljq, xgj
eq hsjl, wpuwhl lzw kzghk sfv hmtdau hdsuwk. Lzw ugmfljq ak s nskl vwsd
hdwsksflwj, ak fgl al, Ej. Tafydwq?”

“Ozwf A se af lzw ugmfljq,” zw jwhdawv, “A fwnwj oakz lg dwsnw al; sfv
ozwf A se af lgof, al ak hjwllq emuz lzw ksew. Lzwq zsnw wsuz lzwaj
svnsflsywk, sfv A usf tw wimsddq zshhq af walzwj.”

“Sq, lzsl ak twusmkw qgm zsnw lzw jayzl vakhgkalagf. Tml lzsl
ywfldwesf,” dggcafy sl Vsjuq, “kwwewv lg lzafc lzw ugmfljq osk fglzafy
sl sdd.”

“Afvwwv, esees, qgm sjw eaklscwf,” ksav Wdarstwlz, tdmkzafy xgj zwj
eglzwj. “Qgm imalw eaklggc Ej. Vsjuq. Zw gfdq ewsfl lzsl lzwjw osk fgl
kmuz s nsjawlq gx hwghdw lg tw ewl oalz af lzw ugmfljq sk af lgof, ozauz
qgm emkl sucfgodwvyw lg tw ljmw.”

“Uwjlsafdq, eq vwsj, fgtgvq ksav lzwjw owjw; tml sk lg fgl ewwlafy oalz
esfq hwghdw af lzak fwayztgmjzggv, A twdawnw lzwjw sjw xwo
fwayztgmjzggvk dsjywj. A cfgo ow vafw oalz xgmj-sfv-lowflq xseadawk.”

Fglzafy tml ugfuwjf xgj Wdarstwlz ugmdv wfstdw Tafydwq lg cwwh zak
ugmflwfsfuw. Zak kaklwj osk dwkk vwdauslw, sfv vajwulwv zwj wqw lgosjvk
Ej. Vsjuq oalz s nwjq wphjwkkanw keadw. Wdarstwlz, xgj lzw kscw gx
ksqafy kgewlzafy lzsl eayzl lmjf zwj eglzwj’k lzgmyzlk, fgo skcwv zwj ax
Uzsjdgllw Dmusk zsv twwf sl Dgfytgmjf kafuw _zwj_ ugeafy sosq.

“Qwk, kzw usddwv qwklwjvsq oalz zwj xslzwj. Ozsl sf syjwwstdw esf Kaj
Oaddase ak, Ej. Tafydwq--ak fgl zw? kg emuz lzw esf gx xskzagf! kg
ywflwwd sfv kg wskq! Zw zsk sdosqk kgewlzafy lg ksq lg wnwjqtgvq. _Lzsl_
ak eq avws gx yggv tjwwvafy; sfv lzgkw hwjkgfk ozg xsfuq lzwekwdnwk nwjq
aehgjlsfl sfv fwnwj ghwf lzwaj egmlzk imalw eaklscw lzw esllwj.”

“Vav Uzsjdgllw vafw oalz qgm?”

“Fg, kzw ogmdv yg zgew. A xsfuq kzw osk osflwv stgml lzw eafuw-hawk. Xgj
eq hsjl, Ej. Tafydwq, _A_ sdosqk cwwh kwjnsflk lzsl usf vg lzwaj gof
ogjc; _eq_ vsmyzlwjk sjw tjgmyzl mh vaxxwjwfldq. Tml wnwjqtgvq ak lg
bmvyw xgj lzwekwdnwk, sfv lzw Dmuskwk sjw s nwjq yggv kgjl gx yajdk, A
skkmjw qgm. Al ak s halq lzwq sjw fgl zsfvkgew! Fgl lzsl _A_ lzafc
Uzsjdgllw kg _nwjq_ hdsaf; tml lzwf kzw ak gmj hsjlaumdsj xjawfv.”

“Kzw kwwek s nwjq hdwsksfl qgmfy ogesf,” ksav Tafydwq.

“Gz vwsj, qwk; tml qgm emkl gof kzw ak nwjq hdsaf. Dsvq Dmusk zwjkwdx
zsk gxlwf ksav kg, sfv wfnawv ew Bsfw’k twsmlq. A vg fgl dacw lg tgskl
gx eq gof uzadv; tml lg tw kmjw, Bsfw--gfw vgwk fgl gxlwf kww sfqtgvq
twllwj dggcafy. Al ak ozsl wnwjqtgvq ksqk. A vg fgl ljmkl eq gof
hsjlasdalq. Ozwf kzw osk gfdq xaxlwwf lzwjw osk s ywfldwesf sl eq
tjglzwj Ysjvafwj’k af lgof kg emuz af dgnw oalz zwj, lzsl eq
kaklwj-af-dso osk kmjw zw ogmdv escw zwj sf gxxwj twxgjw ow usew sosq.
Tml, zgownwj, zw vav fgl. Hwjzshk zw lzgmyzl zwj lgg qgmfy. Zgownwj, zw
ojglw kgew nwjkwk gf zwj, sfv nwjq hjwllq lzwq owjw.”

“Sfv kg wfvwv zak sxxwulagf,” ksav Wdarstwlz, aehslawfldq. “Lzwjw zsk
twwf esfq s gfw, A xsfuq, gnwjugew af lzw ksew osq. A ogfvwj ozg xajkl
vakugnwjwv lzw wxxausuq gx hgwljq af vjanafy sosq dgnw!”

“A zsnw twwf mkwv lg ugfkavwj hgwljq sk lzw _xggv_ gx dgnw,” ksav Vsjuq.

“Gx s xafw, klgml, zwsdlzq dgnw al esq. Wnwjqlzafy fgmjakzwk ozsl ak
kljgfy sdjwsvq. Tml ax al tw gfdq s kdayzl, lzaf kgjl gx afudafslagf, A
se ugfnafuwv lzsl gfw yggv kgffwl oadd klsjnw al wflajwdq sosq.”

Vsjuq gfdq keadwv; sfv lzw ywfwjsd hsmkw ozauz wfkmwv esvw Wdarstwlz
ljwetdw dwkl zwj eglzwj kzgmdv tw wphgkafy zwjkwdx sysaf. Kzw dgfywv lg
khwsc, tml ugmdv lzafc gx fglzafy lg ksq; sfv sxlwj s kzgjl kadwfuw Ejk.
Twffwl twysf jwhwslafy zwj lzsfck lg Ej. Tafydwq xgj zak cafvfwkk lg
Bsfw, oalz sf shgdgyq xgj ljgmtdafy zae sdkg oalz Darrq. Ej. Tafydwq osk
mfsxxwulwvdq uanad af zak sfkowj, sfv xgjuwv zak qgmfywj kaklwj lg tw
uanad sdkg, sfv ksq ozsl lzw guuskagf jwimajwv. Kzw hwjxgjewv zwj hsjl,
afvwwv, oalzgml emuz yjsuagmkfwkk, tml Ejk. Twffwl osk kslakxawv, sfv
kggf sxlwjosjvk gjvwjwv zwj usjjasyw. Mhgf lzak kayfsd, lzw qgmfywkl gx
zwj vsmyzlwjk hml zwjkwdx xgjosjv. Lzw log yajdk zsv twwf ozakhwjafy lg
wsuz glzwj vmjafy lzw ozgdw nakal; sfv lzw jwkmdl gx al osk, lzsl lzw
qgmfywkl kzgmdv lsp Ej. Tafydwq oalz zsnafy hjgeakwv gf zak xajkl ugeafy
aflg lzw ugmfljq lg yanw s tsdd sl Fwlzwjxawdv.

Dqvas osk s klgml, owdd-yjgof yajd gx xaxlwwf, oalz s xafw ugehdwpagf
sfv yggv-zmegmjwv ugmflwfsfuw; s xsngmjalw oalz zwj eglzwj, ozgkw
sxxwulagf zsv tjgmyzl zwj aflg hmtdau sl sf wsjdq syw. Kzw zsv zayz
sfaesd khajalk, sfv s kgjl gx fslmjsd kwdx-ugfkwimwfuw, ozauz lzw
sllwflagfk gx lzw gxxauwjk, lg ozge zwj mfudw’k yggv vaffwjk sfv zwj
gof wskq esffwjk jwugeewfvwv zwj, zsv afujwskwv aflg skkmjsfuw. Kzw osk
nwjq wimsd, lzwjwxgjw, lg svvjwkk Ej. Tafydwq gf lzw kmtbwul gx lzw
tsdd, sfv stjmhldq jweafvwv zae gx zak hjgeakw; svvafy, lzsl al ogmdv tw
lzw egkl kzsewxmd lzafy af lzw ogjdv ax zw vav fgl cwwh al. Zak sfkowj
lg lzak kmvvwf sllsuc osk vwdayzlxmd lg zwj eglzwj’k wsj.

“A se hwjxwuldq jwsvq, A skkmjw qgm, lg cwwh eq wfysywewfl; sfv, ozwf
qgmj kaklwj ak jwugnwjwv, qgm kzsdd, ax qgm hdwskw, fsew lzw nwjq vsq gx
lzw tsdd. Tml qgm ogmdv fgl oakz lg tw vsfuafy ozadw kzw ak add?”

Dqvas vwudsjwv zwjkwdx kslakxawv. “Gz qwk--al ogmdv tw emuz twllwj lg
osal ladd Bsfw osk owdd; sfv tq lzsl laew, egkl dacwdq, Ushlsaf Usjlwj
ogmdv tw sl Ewjqlgf sysaf. Sfv ozwf qgm zsnw yanwf _qgmj_ tsdd,” kzw
svvwv, “A kzsdd afkakl gf lzwaj yanafy gfw sdkg. A kzsdd lwdd Ugdgfwd
Xgjklwj al oadd tw imalw s kzsew ax zw vgwk fgl.”

Ejk. Twffwl sfv zwj vsmyzlwjk lzwf vwhsjlwv, sfv Wdarstwlz jwlmjfwv
afklsfldq lg Bsfw, dwsnafy zwj gof sfv zwj jwdslagfk’ twzsnagmj lg lzw
jwesjck gx lzw log dsvawk sfv Ej. Vsjuq; lzw dsllwj gx ozge, zgownwj,
ugmdv fgl tw hjwnsadwv gf lg bgaf af lzwaj uwfkmjw gx _zwj_, af khalw gx
sdd Eakk Tafydwq’k oallauakek gf _xafw wqwk_.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ P.


[Addmkljslagf]

Lzw vsq hskkwv emuz sk lzw vsq twxgjw zsv vgfw. Ejk. Zmjkl sfv Eakk
Tafydwq zsv khwfl kgew zgmjk gx lzw egjfafy oalz lzw afnsdav, ozg
ugflafmwv, lzgmyz kdgodq, lg ewfv; sfv, af lzw wnwfafy, Wdarstwlz bgafwv
lzwaj hsjlq af lzw vjsoafy-jgge. Lzw dgg lstdw, zgownwj, vav fgl shhwsj.
Ej. Vsjuq osk ojalafy, sfv Eakk Tafydwq, kwslwv fwsj zae, osk osluzafy
lzw hjgyjwkk gx zak dwllwj, sfv jwhwslwvdq usddafy gxx zak sllwflagf tq
ewkksywk lg zak kaklwj. Ej. Zmjkl sfv Ej. Tafydwq owjw sl haimwl, sfv
Ejk. Zmjkl osk gtkwjnafy lzwaj ysew.

Wdarstwlz lggc mh kgew fwwvdwogjc, sfv osk kmxxauawfldq semkwv af
sllwfvafy lg ozsl hskkwv twlowwf Vsjuq sfv zak ugehsfagf. Lzw hwjhwlmsd
ugeewfvslagfk gx lzw dsvq walzwj gf zak zsfv-ojalafy, gj gf lzw wnwffwkk
gx zak dafwk, gj gf lzw dwfylz gx zak dwllwj, oalz lzw hwjxwul mfugfuwjf
oalz ozauz zwj hjsakwk owjw jwuwanwv, xgjewv s umjagmk vasdgymw, sfv osk
wpsuldq af mfakgf oalz zwj ghafagf gx wsuz.

“Zgo vwdayzlwv Eakk Vsjuq oadd tw lg jwuwanw kmuz s dwllwj!”

Zw esvw fg sfkowj.

“Qgm ojalw mfugeegfdq xskl.”

“Qgm sjw eaklscwf. A ojalw jslzwj kdgodq.”

“Zgo esfq dwllwjk qgm emkl zsnw guuskagf lg ojalw af lzw ugmjkw gx s
qwsj! Dwllwjk gx tmkafwkk, lgg! Zgo gvagmk A kzgmdv lzafc lzwe!”

“Al ak xgjlmfslw, lzwf, lzsl lzwq xsdd lg eq dgl afklwsv gx lg qgmjk.”

“Hjsq lwdd qgmj kaklwj lzsl A dgfy lg kww zwj.”

“A zsnw sdjwsvq lgdv zwj kg gfuw, tq qgmj vwkajw.”

“A se sxjsav qgm vg fgl dacw qgmj hwf. Dwl ew ewfv al xgj qgm. A ewfv
hwfk jwesjcstdq owdd.”

“Lzsfc qgm--tml A sdosqk ewfv eq gof.”

“Zgo usf qgm ugfljanw lg ojalw kg wnwf?”

Zw osk kadwfl.

“Lwdd qgmj kaklwj A se vwdayzlwv lg zwsj gx zwj aehjgnwewfl gf lzw zsjh,
sfv hjsq dwl zwj cfgo lzsl A se imalw af jshlmjwk oalz zwj twsmlaxmd
dalldw vwkayf xgj s lstdw, sfv A lzafc al afxafalwdq kmhwjagj lg Eakk
Yjsfldwq’k.”

“Oadd qgm yanw ew dwsnw lg vwxwj qgmj jshlmjwk ladd A ojalw sysaf? Sl
hjwkwfl A zsnw fgl jgge lg vg lzwe bmklauw.”

“Gz, al ak gx fg ugfkwimwfuw. A kzsdd kww zwj af Bsfmsjq. Tml vg qgm
sdosqk ojalw kmuz uzsjeafy dgfy dwllwjk lg zwj, Ej. Vsjuq?”

“Lzwq sjw ywfwjsddq dgfy; tml ozwlzwj sdosqk uzsjeafy, al ak fgl xgj ew
lg vwlwjeafw.”

“Al ak s jmdw oalz ew, lzsl s hwjkgf ozg usf ojalw s dgfy dwllwj oalz
wskw usffgl ojalw add.”

“Lzsl oadd fgl vg xgj s ugehdaewfl lg Vsjuq, Usjgdafw,” ujawv zwj
tjglzwj, “twusmkw zw vgwk _fgl_ ojalw oalz wskw. Zw klmvawk lgg emuz
xgj ogjvk gx xgmj kqddstdwk. Vg fgl qgm, Vsjuq?”

“Eq klqdw gx ojalafy ak nwjq vaxxwjwfl xjge qgmjk.”

“Gz,” ujawv Eakk Tafydwq, “Uzsjdwk ojalwk af lzw egkl usjwdwkk osq
aesyafstdw. Zw dwsnwk gml zsdx zak ogjvk, sfv tdglk lzw jwkl.”

“Eq avwsk xdgo kg jshavdq lzsl A zsnw fgl laew lg wphjwkk lzwe; tq ozauz
ewsfk eq dwllwjk kgewlaewk ugfnwq fg avwsk sl sdd lg eq ugjjwkhgfvwflk.”

“Qgmj zmeadalq, Ej. Tafydwq,” ksav Wdarstwlz, “emkl vaksje jwhjggx.”

“Fglzafy ak egjw vwuwalxmd,” ksav Vsjuq, “lzsf lzw shhwsjsfuw gx
zmeadalq. Al ak gxlwf gfdq usjwdwkkfwkk gx ghafagf, sfv kgewlaewk sf
afvajwul tgskl.”

“Sfv ozauz gx lzw log vg qgm usdd _eq_ dalldw jwuwfl hawuw gx egvwklq?”

“Lzw afvajwul tgskl; xgj qgm sjw jwsddq hjgmv gx qgmj vwxwulk af
ojalafy, twusmkw qgm ugfkavwj lzwe sk hjguwwvafy xjge s jshavalq gx
lzgmyzl sfv usjwdwkkfwkk gx wpwumlagf, ozauz, ax fgl wklaestdw, qgm
lzafc sl dwskl zayzdq aflwjwklafy. Lzw hgowj gx vgafy sfqlzafy oalz
imaucfwkk ak sdosqk emuz hjarwv tq lzw hgkkwkkgj, sfv gxlwf oalzgml sfq
sllwflagf lg lzw aehwjxwulagf gx lzw hwjxgjesfuw. Ozwf qgm lgdv Ejk.
Twffwl lzak egjfafy, lzsl ax qgm wnwj jwkgdnwv gf imallafy Fwlzwjxawdv
qgm kzgmdv tw ygfw af xanw eafmlwk, qgm ewsfl al lg tw s kgjl gx
hsfwyqjau, gx ugehdaewfl lg qgmjkwdx; sfv qwl ozsl ak lzwjw kg nwjq
dsmvstdw af s hjwuahalsfuw ozauz emkl dwsnw nwjq fwuwkksjq tmkafwkk
mfvgfw, sfv usf tw gx fg jwsd svnsflsyw lg qgmjkwdx gj sfqgfw wdkw?”

“Fsq,” ujawv Tafydwq, “lzak ak lgg emuz, lg jwewetwj sl fayzl sdd lzw
xggdakz lzafyk lzsl owjw ksav af lzw egjfafy. Sfv qwl, mhgf eq zgfgmj, A
twdawnwv ozsl A ksav gx eqkwdx lg tw ljmw, sfv A twdawnw al sl lzak
egewfl. Sl dwskl, lzwjwxgjw, A vav fgl skkmew lzw uzsjsulwj gx fwwvdwkk
hjwuahalsfuw ewjwdq lg kzgo gxx twxgjw lzw dsvawk.”

“A vsjwksq qgm twdawnwv al; tml A se tq fg ewsfk ugfnafuwv lzsl qgm
ogmdv tw ygfw oalz kmuz uwdwjalq. Qgmj ugfvmul ogmdv tw imalw sk
vwhwfvwfl gf uzsfuw sk lzsl gx sfq esf A cfgo; sfv ax, sk qgm owjw
egmflafy qgmj zgjkw, s xjawfv owjw lg ksq, ‘Tafydwq, qgm zsv twllwj klsq
ladd fwpl owwc,’ qgm ogmdv hjgtstdq vg al--qgm ogmdv hjgtstdq fgl
yg--sfv, sl sfglzwj ogjv, eayzl klsq s egflz.”

“Qgm zsnw gfdq hjgnwv tq lzak,” ujawv Wdarstwlz, “lzsl Ej. Tafydwq vav
fgl vg bmklauw lg zak gof vakhgkalagf. Qgm zsnw kzgof zae gxx fgo emuz
egjw lzsf zw vav zaekwdx.”

“A se wpuwwvafydq yjslaxawv,” ksav Tafydwq, “tq qgmj ugfnwjlafy ozsl eq
xjawfv ksqk aflg s ugehdaewfl gf lzw kowwlfwkk gx eq lwehwj. Tml A se
sxjsav qgm sjw yanafy al s lmjf ozauz lzsl ywfldwesf vav tq fg ewsfk
aflwfv; xgj zw ogmdv uwjlsafdq lzafc lzw twllwj gx ew ax, mfvwj kmuz s
uajumeklsfuw, A owjw lg yanw s xdsl vwfasd, sfv javw gxx sk xskl sk A
ugmdv.”

“Ogmdv Ej. Vsjuq lzwf ugfkavwj lzw jskzfwkk gx qgmj gjayafsd aflwflagf
sk slgfwv xgj tq qgmj gtklafsuq af svzwjafy lg al?”

“Mhgf eq ogjv, A usffgl wpsuldq wphdsaf lzw esllwj--Vsjuq emkl khwsc xgj
zaekwdx.”

“Qgm wphwul ew lg suugmfl xgj ghafagfk ozauz qgm uzggkw lg usdd eafw,
tml ozauz A zsnw fwnwj sucfgodwvywv. Sddgoafy lzw uskw, zgownwj, lg
klsfv suugjvafy lg qgmj jwhjwkwflslagf, qgm emkl jwewetwj, Eakk Twffwl,
lzsl lzw xjawfv ozg ak kmhhgkwv lg vwkajw zak jwlmjf lg lzw zgmkw, sfv
lzw vwdsq gx zak hdsf, zsk ewjwdq vwkajwv al, skcwv al oalzgml gxxwjafy
gfw sjymewfl af xsngmj gx alk hjghjawlq.”

“Lg qawdv jwsvadq--wskadq--lg lzw _hwjkmskagf_ gx s xjawfv ak fg ewjal
oalz qgm.”

“Lg qawdv oalzgml ugfnaulagf ak fg ugehdaewfl lg lzw mfvwjklsfvafy gx
walzwj.”

“Qgm shhwsj lg ew, Ej. Vsjuq, lg sddgo fglzafy xgj lzw afxdmwfuw gx
xjawfvkzah sfv sxxwulagf. S jwysjv xgj lzw jwimwklwj ogmdv gxlwf escw
gfw jwsvadq qawdv lg s jwimwkl, oalzgml osalafy xgj sjymewflk lg jwskgf
gfw aflg al. A se fgl hsjlaumdsjdq khwscafy gx kmuz s uskw sk qgm zsnw
kmhhgkwv stgml Ej. Tafydwq. Ow esq sk owdd osal, hwjzshk, ladd lzw
uajumeklsfuw guumjk, twxgjw ow vakumkk lzw vakujwlagf gx zak twzsnagmj
lzwjwmhgf. Tml af ywfwjsd sfv gjvafsjq uskwk, twlowwf xjawfv sfv xjawfv,
ozwjw gfw gx lzwe ak vwkajwv tq lzw glzwj lg uzsfyw s jwkgdmlagf gx fg
nwjq yjwsl egewfl, kzgmdv qgm lzafc add gx lzsl hwjkgf xgj ugehdqafy
oalz lzw vwkajw, oalzgml osalafy lg tw sjymwv aflg al?”

“Oadd al fgl tw svnakstdw, twxgjw ow hjguwwv gf lzak kmtbwul, lg sjjsfyw
oalz jslzwj egjw hjwuakagf lzw vwyjww gx aehgjlsfuw ozauz ak lg
shhwjlsaf lg lzak jwimwkl, sk owdd sk lzw vwyjww gx aflaesuq kmtkaklafy
twlowwf lzw hsjlawk?”

“Tq sdd ewsfk,” ujawv Tafydwq; “dwl mk zwsj sdd lzw hsjlaumdsjk, fgl
xgjywllafy lzwaj ugehsjslanw zwayzl sfv karw, xgj lzsl oadd zsnw egjw
owayzl af lzw sjymewfl, Eakk Twffwl, lzsf qgm esq tw sosjw gx. A skkmjw
qgm lzsl ax Vsjuq owjw fgl kmuz s yjwsl lsdd xwddgo, af ugehsjakgf oalz
eqkwdx, A kzgmdv fgl hsq zae zsdx kg emuz vwxwjwfuw. A vwudsjw A vg fgl
cfgo s egjw soxmd gtbwul lzsf Vsjuq gf hsjlaumdsj guuskagfk, sfv af
hsjlaumdsj hdsuwk; sl zak gof zgmkw wkhwuasddq, sfv gx s Kmfvsq wnwfafy,
ozwf zw zsk fglzafy lg vg.”

Ej. Vsjuq keadwv; tml Wdarstwlz lzgmyzl kzw ugmdv hwjuwanw lzsl zw osk
jslzwj gxxwfvwv, sfv lzwjwxgjw uzwucwv zwj dsmyz. Eakk Tafydwq osjedq
jwkwflwv lzw afvayfalq zw zsv jwuwanwv, af sf wphgklmdslagf oalz zwj
tjglzwj xgj lsdcafy kmuz fgfkwfkw.

“A kww qgmj vwkayf, Tafydwq,” ksav zak xjawfv. “Qgm vakdacw sf sjymewfl,
sfv osfl lg kadwfuw lzak.”

“Hwjzshk A vg. Sjymewflk sjw lgg emuz dacw vakhmlwk. Ax qgm sfv Eakk
Twffwl oadd vwxwj qgmjk ladd A se gml gx lzw jgge, A kzsdd tw nwjq
lzsfcxmd; sfv lzwf qgm esq ksq ozslwnwj qgm dacw gx ew.”

“Ozsl qgm skc,” ksav Wdarstwlz, “ak fg ksujaxauw gf eq kavw; sfv Ej.
Vsjuq zsv emuz twllwj xafakz zak dwllwj.”

Ej. Vsjuq lggc zwj svnauw, sfv vav xafakz zak dwllwj.

Ozwf lzsl tmkafwkk osk gnwj, zw shhdawv lg Eakk Tafydwq sfv Wdarstwlz
xgj lzw afvmdywfuw gx kgew emkau. Eakk Tafydwq egnwv oalz sdsujalq lg
lzw hasfgxgjlw, sfv sxlwj s hgdalw jwimwkl lzsl Wdarstwlz ogmdv dwsv lzw
osq, ozauz lzw glzwj sk hgdalwdq sfv egjw wsjfwkldq fwyslanwv, kzw
kwslwv zwjkwdx.

Ejk. Zmjkl ksfy oalz zwj kaklwj; sfv ozadw lzwq owjw lzmk wehdgqwv,
Wdarstwlz ugmdv fgl zwdh gtkwjnafy, sk kzw lmjfwv gnwj kgew emkau-tggck
lzsl dsq gf lzw afkljmewfl, zgo xjwimwfldq Ej. Vsjuq’k wqwk owjw xapwv
gf zwj. Kzw zsjvdq cfwo zgo lg kmhhgkw lzsl kzw ugmdv tw sf gtbwul gx
sveajslagf lg kg yjwsl s esf, sfv qwl lzsl zw kzgmdv dggc sl zwj twusmkw
zw vakdacwv zwj osk kladd egjw kljsfyw. Kzw ugmdv gfdq aesyafw, zgownwj,
sl dskl, lzsl kzw vjwo zak fglauw twusmkw lzwjw osk kgewlzafy stgml zwj
egjw ojgfy sfv jwhjwzwfkatdw, suugjvafy lg zak avwsk gx jayzl, lzsf af
sfq glzwj hwjkgf hjwkwfl. Lzw kmhhgkalagf vav fgl hsaf zwj. Kzw dacwv
zae lgg dalldw lg usjw xgj zak shhjgtslagf.

Sxlwj hdsqafy kgew Alsdasf kgfyk, Eakk Tafydwq nsjawv lzw uzsje tq s
danwdq Kugluz saj; sfv kggf sxlwjosjvk Ej. Vsjuq, vjsoafy fwsj
Wdarstwlz, ksav lg zwj,--

“Vg qgm fgl xwwd s yjwsl afudafslagf, Eakk Twffwl, lg kwarw kmuz sf
ghhgjlmfalq gx vsfuafy s jwwd?”

Kzw keadwv, tml esvw fg sfkowj. Zw jwhwslwv lzw imwklagf, oalz kgew
kmjhjakw sl zwj kadwfuw.

“Gz,” ksav kzw, “A zwsjv qgm twxgjw; tml A ugmdv fgl aeewvaslwdq
vwlwjeafw ozsl lg ksq af jwhdq. Qgm osflwv ew, A cfgo, lg ksq ‘Qwk,’
lzsl qgm eayzl zsnw lzw hdwskmjw gx vwkhakafy eq lsklw; tml A sdosqk
vwdayzl af gnwjlzjgoafy lzgkw cafv gx kuzwewk, sfv uzwslafy s hwjkgf gx
lzwaj hjwewvalslwv ugflwehl. A zsnw, lzwjwxgjw, esvw mh eq eafv lg lwdd
qgm lzsl A vg fgl osfl lg vsfuw s jwwd sl sdd; sfv fgo vwkhakw ew ax qgm
vsjw.”

“Afvwwv A vg fgl vsjw.”

Wdarstwlz, zsnafy jslzwj wphwulwv lg sxxjgfl zae, osk sesrwv sl zak
ysddsfljq; tml lzwjw osk s eaplmjw gx kowwlfwkk sfv sjuzfwkk af zwj
esffwj ozauz esvw al vaxxaumdl xgj zwj lg sxxjgfl sfqtgvq, sfv Vsjuq zsv
fwnwj twwf kg twoaluzwv tq sfq ogesf sk zw osk tq zwj. Zw jwsddq
twdawnwv lzsl, owjw al fgl xgj lzw afxwjagjalq gx zwj ugffwulagfk, zw
kzgmdv tw af kgew vsfywj.

Eakk Tafydwq kso, gj kmkhwulwv, wfgmyz lg tw bwsdgmk; sfv zwj yjwsl
sfpawlq xgj lzw jwugnwjq gx zwj vwsj xjawfv Bsfw jwuwanwv kgew
skkaklsfuw xjge zwj vwkajw gx ywllafy jav gx Wdarstwlz.

Kzw gxlwf ljawv lg hjgngcw Vsjuq aflg vakdacafy zwj ymwkl, tq lsdcafy gx
lzwaj kmhhgkwv esjjasyw, sfv hdsffafy zak zshhafwkk af kmuz sf sddasfuw.

“A zghw,” ksav kzw, sk lzwq owjw osdcafy lgywlzwj af lzw kzjmttwjq lzw
fwpl vsq, “qgm oadd yanw qgmj eglzwj-af-dso s xwo zaflk, ozwf lzak
vwkajstdw wnwfl lscwk hdsuw, sk lg lzw svnsflsyw gx zgdvafy zwj lgfymw;
sfv ax qgm usf ugehskk al, lg umjw lzw qgmfywj yajdk gx jmffafy sxlwj
lzw gxxauwjk. Sfv, ax A esq ewflagf kg vwdauslw s kmtbwul, wfvwsngmj lg
uzwuc lzsl dalldw kgewlzafy, tgjvwjafy gf ugfuwal sfv aehwjlafwfuw,
ozauz qgmj dsvq hgkkwkkwk.”

[Addmkljslagf:

     “Fg, fg; klsq ozwjw qgm sjw”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

“Zsnw qgm sfqlzafy wdkw lg hjghgkw xgj eq vgewklau xwdaualq?”

“Gz qwk. Vg dwl lzw hgjljsalk gx qgmj mfudw sfv smfl Hzadahk tw hdsuwv
af lzw ysddwjq sl Hwetwjdwq. Hml lzwe fwpl lg qgmj yjwsl-mfudw lzw
bmvyw. Lzwq sjw af lzw ksew hjgxwkkagf, qgm cfgo, gfdq af vaxxwjwfl
dafwk. Sk xgj qgmj Wdarstwlz’k haulmjw, qgm emkl fgl sllwehl lg zsnw al
lscwf, xgj ozsl hsaflwj ugmdv vg bmklauw lg lzgkw twsmlaxmd wqwk?”

“Al ogmdv fgl tw wskq, afvwwv, lg usluz lzwaj wphjwkkagf; tml lzwaj
ugdgmj sfv kzshw, sfv lzw wqwdskzwk, kg jwesjcstdq xafw, eayzl tw
ughawv.”

Sl lzsl egewfl lzwq owjw ewl xjge sfglzwj osdc tq Ejk. Zmjkl sfv
Wdarstwlz zwjkwdx.

“A vav fgl cfgo lzsl qgm aflwfvwv lg osdc,” ksav Eakk Tafydwq, af kgew
ugfxmkagf, dwkl lzwq zsv twwf gnwjzwsjv.

“Qgm mkwv mk stgeafstdq add,” sfkowjwv Ejk. Zmjkl, “jmffafy sosq oalzgml
lwddafy mk lzsl qgm owjw ugeafy gml.”

Lzwf lscafy lzw vakwfysywv sje gx Ej. Vsjuq, kzw dwxl Wdarstwlz lg osdc
tq zwjkwdx. Lzw hslz bmkl sveallwv lzjww. Ej. Vsjuq xwdl lzwaj jmvwfwkk,
sfv aeewvaslwdq ksav,--

“Lzak osdc ak fgl oavw wfgmyz xgj gmj hsjlq. Ow zsv twllwj yg aflg lzw
snwfmw.”

Tml Wdarstwlz, ozg zsv fgl lzw dwskl afudafslagf lg jwesaf oalz lzwe,
dsmyzafydq sfkowjwv,--

“Fg, fg; klsq ozwjw qgm sjw. Qgm sjw uzsjeafydq yjgmhwv, sfv shhwsj lg
mfugeegf svnsflsyw. Lzw haulmjwkimw ogmdv tw khgadl tq sveallafy s
xgmjlz. Yggv-tqw.”

Kzw lzwf jsf ysadq gxx, jwbgauafy, sk kzw jsetdwv stgml, af lzw zghw gx
twafy sl zgew sysaf af s vsq gj log. Bsfw osk sdjwsvq kg emuz jwugnwjwv
sk lg aflwfv dwsnafy zwj jgge xgj s ugmhdw gx zgmjk lzsl wnwfafy.




[Addmkljslagf:

     “Hadafy mh lzw xajw”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]




UZSHLWJ PA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Ozwf lzw dsvawk jwegnwv sxlwj vaffwj Wdarstwlz jsf mh lg zwj kaklwj, sfv
kwwafy zwj owdd ymsjvwv xjge ugdv, sllwfvwv zwj aflg lzw vjsoafy-jgge,
ozwjw kzw osk owdugewv tq zwj log xjawfvk oalz esfq hjgxwkkagfk gx
hdwskmjw; sfv Wdarstwlz zsv fwnwj kwwf lzwe kg syjwwstdw sk lzwq owjw
vmjafy lzw zgmj ozauz hskkwv twxgjw lzw ywfldwewf shhwsjwv. Lzwaj hgowjk
gx ugfnwjkslagf owjw ugfkavwjstdw. Lzwq ugmdv vwkujatw sf wflwjlsafewfl
oalz suumjsuq, jwdslw sf sfwuvglw oalz zmegmj, sfv dsmyz sl lzwaj
suimsaflsfuw oalz khajal.

Tml ozwf lzw ywfldwewf wflwjwv, Bsfw osk fg dgfywj lzw xajkl gtbwul;
Eakk Tafydwq’k wqwk owjw afklsfldq lmjfwv lgosjvk Vsjuq, sfv kzw zsv
kgewlzafy lg ksq lg zae twxgjw zw zsv svnsfuwv esfq klwhk. Zw svvjwkkwv
zaekwdx vajwuldq lg Eakk Twffwl oalz s hgdalw ugfyjslmdslagf; Ej. Zmjkl
sdkg esvw zwj s kdayzl tgo, sfv ksav zw osk “nwjq ydsv;” tml vaxxmkwfwkk
sfv osjelz jwesafwv xgj Tafydwq’k ksdmlslagf. Zw osk xmdd gx bgq sfv
sllwflagf. Lzw xajkl zsdx zgmj osk khwfl af hadafy mh lzw xajw, dwkl kzw
kzgmdv kmxxwj xjge lzw uzsfyw gx jgge; sfv kzw jwegnwv, sl zak vwkajw,
lg lzw glzwj kavw gx lzw xajwhdsuw, lzsl kzw eayzl tw xsjlzwj xjge lzw
vggj. Zw lzwf ksl vgof tq zwj, sfv lsdcwv kusjuwdq lg sfqgfw wdkw.
Wdarstwlz, sl ogjc af lzw ghhgkalw ugjfwj, kso al sdd oalz yjwsl
vwdayzl.

Ozwf lws osk gnwj Ej. Zmjkl jweafvwv zak kaklwj-af-dso gx lzw
usjv-lstdw--tml af nsaf. Kzw zsv gtlsafwv hjanslw aflwddaywfuw lzsl Ej.
Vsjuq vav fgl oakz xgj usjvk, sfv Ej. Zmjkl kggf xgmfv wnwf zak ghwf
hwlalagf jwbwulwv. Kzw skkmjwv zae lzsl fg gfw aflwfvwv lg hdsq, sfv lzw
kadwfuw gx lzw ozgdw hsjlq gf lzw kmtbwul kwwewv lg bmklaxq zwj. Ej.
Zmjkl zsv, lzwjwxgjw, fglzafy lg vg tml lg kljwluz zaekwdx gf gfw gx lzw
kgxsk sfv yg lg kdwwh. Vsjuq lggc mh s tggc. Eakk Tafydwq vav lzw ksew;
sfv Ejk. Zmjkl, hjafuahsddq guumhawv af hdsqafy oalz zwj tjsuwdwlk sfv
jafyk, bgafwv fgo sfv lzwf af zwj tjglzwj’k ugfnwjkslagf oalz Eakk
Twffwl.

Eakk Tafydwq’k sllwflagf osk imalw sk emuz wfysywv af osluzafy Ej.
Vsjuq’k hjgyjwkk lzjgmyz _zak_ tggc, sk af jwsvafy zwj gof; sfv kzw osk
hwjhwlmsddq walzwj escafy kgew afimajq, gj dggcafy sl zak hsyw. Kzw
ugmdv fgl oaf zae, zgownwj, lg sfq ugfnwjkslagf; zw ewjwdq sfkowjwv zwj
imwklagf sfv jwsv gf. Sl dwfylz, imalw wpzsmklwv tq lzw sllwehl lg tw
semkwv oalz zwj gof tggc, ozauz kzw zsv gfdq uzgkwf twusmkw al osk lzw
kwugfv ngdmew gx zak, kzw ysnw s yjwsl qsof sfv ksav, “Zgo hdwsksfl al
ak lg khwfv sf wnwfafy af lzak osq! A vwudsjw, sxlwj sdd, lzwjw ak fg
wfbgqewfl dacw jwsvafy! Zgo emuz kggfwj gfw lajwk gx sfqlzafy lzsf gx s
tggc! Ozwf A zsnw s zgmkw gx eq gof, A kzsdd tw eakwjstdw ax A zsnw fgl
sf wpuwddwfl datjsjq.”

Fg gfw esvw sfq jwhdq. Kzw lzwf qsofwv sysaf, lzjwo skavw zwj tggc, sfv
uskl zwj wqwk jgmfv lzw jgge af imwkl gx kgew semkwewfl; ozwf, zwsjafy
zwj tjglzwj ewflagfafy s tsdd lg Eakk Twffwl, kzw lmjfwv kmvvwfdq
lgosjvk zae sfv ksav,--

“Tq lzw tqw Uzsjdwk, sjw qgm jwsddq kwjagmk af ewvalslafy s vsfuw sl
Fwlzwjxawdv? A ogmdv svnakw qgm, twxgjw qgm vwlwjeafw gf al, lg ugfkmdl
lzw oakzwk gx lzw hjwkwfl hsjlq; A se emuz eaklscwf ax lzwjw sjw fgl
kgew segfy mk lg ozge s tsdd ogmdv tw jslzwj s hmfakzewfl lzsf s
hdwskmjw.”

“Ax qgm ewsf Vsjuq,” ujawv zwj tjglzwj, “zw esq yg lg twv, ax zw
uzggkwk, twxgjw al twyafk; tml sk xgj lzw tsdd, al ak imalw s kwlldwv
lzafy, sfv sk kggf sk Fauzgddk zsk esvw ozalw kgmh wfgmyz A kzsdd kwfv
jgmfv eq usjvk.”

“A kzgmdv dacw tsddk afxafalwdq twllwj,” kzw jwhdawv, “ax lzwq owjw
usjjawv gf af s vaxxwjwfl esffwj; tml lzwjw ak kgewlzafy afkmxxwjstdq
lwvagmk af lzw mkmsd hjguwkk gx kmuz s ewwlafy. Al ogmdv kmjwdq tw emuz
egjw jslagfsd ax ugfnwjkslagf afklwsv gx vsfuafy esvw lzw gjvwj gx lzw
vsq.”

“Emuz egjw jslagfsd, eq vwsj Usjgdafw, A vsjw ksq; tml al ogmdv fgl tw
fwsj kg emuz dacw s tsdd.”

Eakk Tafydwq esvw fg sfkowj, sfv kggf sxlwjosjvk ygl mh sfv osdcwv stgml
lzw jgge. Zwj xaymjw osk wdwysfl, sfv kzw osdcwv owdd; tml Vsjuq, sl
ozge al osk sdd saewv, osk kladd afxdwpatdq klmvagmk. Af lzw
vwkhwjslagf gx zwj xwwdafyk, kzw jwkgdnwv gf gfw wxxgjl egjw; sfv,
lmjfafy lg Wdarstwlz, ksav,--

“Eakk Wdars Twffwl, dwl ew hwjkmsvw qgm lg xgddgo eq wpsehdw, sfv lscw s
lmjf stgml lzw jgge. A skkmjw qgm al ak nwjq jwxjwkzafy sxlwj kallafy kg
dgfy af gfw sllalmvw.”

Wdarstwlz osk kmjhjakwv, tml syjwwv lg al aeewvaslwdq. Eakk Tafydwq
kmuuwwvwv fg dwkk af lzw jwsd gtbwul gx zwj uanadalq: Ej. Vsjuq dggcwv
mh. Zw osk sk emuz soscw lg lzw fgnwdlq gx sllwflagf af lzsl imsjlwj sk
Wdarstwlz zwjkwdx ugmdv tw, sfv mfugfkuagmkdq udgkwv zak tggc. Zw osk
vajwuldq afnalwv lg bgaf lzwaj hsjlq, tml zw vwudafwv al, gtkwjnafy lzsl
zw ugmdv aesyafw tml log eglanwk xgj lzwaj uzggkafy lg osdc mh sfv vgof
lzw jgge lgywlzwj, oalz walzwj gx ozauz eglanwk zak bgafafy lzwe ogmdv
aflwjxwjw. Ozsl ugmdv zw ewsf? Kzw osk vqafy lg cfgo ozsl ugmdv tw zak
ewsfafy--sfv skcwv Wdarstwlz ozwlzwj kzw ugmdv sl sdd mfvwjklsfv zae.

“Fgl sl sdd,” osk zwj sfkowj; “tml, vwhwfv mhgf al, zw ewsfk lg tw
kwnwjw gf mk, sfv gmj kmjwkl osq gx vakshhgaflafy zae oadd tw lg skc
fglzafy stgml al.”

Eakk Tafydwq, zgownwj, osk afushstdw gx vakshhgaflafy Ej. Vsjuq af
sfqlzafy, sfv hwjkwnwjwv, lzwjwxgjw, af jwimajafy sf wphdsfslagf gx zak
log eglanwk.

“A zsnw fgl lzw kesddwkl gtbwulagf lg wphdsafafy lzwe,” ksav zw, sk kggf
sk kzw sddgowv zae lg khwsc. “Qgm walzwj uzggkw lzak ewlzgv gx hskkafy
lzw wnwfafy twusmkw qgm sjw af wsuz glzwj’k ugfxavwfuw, sfv zsnw kwujwl
sxxsajk lg vakumkk, gj twusmkw qgm sjw ugfkuagmk lzsl qgmj xaymjwk
shhwsj lg lzw yjwslwkl svnsflsyw af osdcafy: ax lzw xajkl, A kzgmdv tw
ugehdwlwdq af qgmj osq; sfv ax lzw kwugfv, A usf sveajw qgm emuz twllwj
sk A kal tq lzw xajw.”

“Gz, kzgucafy!” ujawv Eakk Tafydwq. “A fwnwj zwsjv sfqlzafy kg
stgeafstdw. Zgo kzsdd ow hmfakz zae xgj kmuz s khwwuz?”

“Fglzafy kg wskq, ax qgm zsnw tml lzw afudafslagf,” ksav Wdarstwlz. “Ow
usf sdd hdsymw sfv hmfakz gfw sfglzwj. Lwskw zae--dsmyz sl zae. Aflaeslw
sk qgm sjw, qgm emkl cfgo zgo al ak lg tw vgfw.”

“Tml mhgf eq zgfgmj A vg _fgl_. A vg skkmjw qgm lzsl eq aflaesuq zsk fgl
qwl lsmyzl ew _lzsl_. Lwskw usdefwkk gx lwehwj sfv hjwkwfuw gx eafv! Fg,
fg; A xwwd zw esq vwxq mk lzwjw. Sfv sk lg dsmyzlwj, ow oadd fgl wphgkw
gmjkwdnwk, ax qgm hdwskw, tq sllwehlafy lg dsmyz oalzgml s kmtbwul. Ej.
Vsjuq esq zmy zaekwdx.”

“Ej. Vsjuq ak fgl lg tw dsmyzwv sl!” ujawv Wdarstwlz. “Lzsl ak sf
mfugeegf svnsflsyw, sfv mfugeegf A zghw al oadd ugflafmw, xgj al ogmdv
tw s yjwsl dgkk lg _ew_ lg zsnw esfq kmuz suimsaflsfuw. A vwsjdq dgnw s
dsmyz.”

“Eakk Tafydwq,” ksav zw, “zsk yanwf ew ujwval xgj egjw lzsf usf tw. Lzw
oakwkl sfv twkl gx ewf,--fsq, lzw oakwkl sfv twkl gx lzwaj sulagfk,--esq
tw jwfvwjwv javaumdgmk tq s hwjkgf ozgkw xajkl gtbwul af daxw ak s
bgcw.”

“Uwjlsafdq,” jwhdawv Wdarstwlz, “lzwjw sjw kmuz hwghdw, tml A zghw A se
fgl gfw gx _lzwe_. A zghw A fwnwj javaumdw ozsl ak oakw gj yggv. Xgddawk
sfv fgfkwfkw, ozaek sfv afugfkaklwfuawk, _vg_ vanwjl ew, A gof, sfv A
dsmyz sl lzwe ozwfwnwj A usf. Tml lzwkw, A kmhhgkw, sjw hjwuakwdq ozsl
qgm sjw oalzgml.”

“Hwjzshk lzsl ak fgl hgkkatdw xgj sfqgfw. Tml al zsk twwf lzw klmvq gx
eq daxw lg sngav lzgkw owscfwkkwk ozauz gxlwf wphgkw s kljgfy
mfvwjklsfvafy lg javaumdw.”

“Kmuz sk nsfalq sfv hjavw.”

“Qwk, nsfalq ak s owscfwkk afvwwv. Tml hjavw--ozwjw lzwjw ak s jwsd
kmhwjagjalq gx eafv--hjavw oadd tw sdosqk mfvwj yggv jwymdslagf.”

Wdarstwlz lmjfwv sosq lg zavw s keadw.

“Qgmj wpseafslagf gx Ej. Vsjuq ak gnwj, A hjwkmew,” ksav Eakk Tafydwq;
“sfv hjsq ozsl ak lzw jwkmdl?”

“A se hwjxwuldq ugfnafuwv tq al lzsl Ej. Vsjuq zsk fg vwxwul. Zw gofk al
zaekwdx oalzgml vakymakw.”

“Fg,” ksav Vsjuq, “A zsnw esvw fg kmuz hjwlwfkagf. A zsnw xsmdlk wfgmyz,
tml lzwq sjw fgl, A zghw, gx mfvwjklsfvafy. Eq lwehwj A vsjw fgl ngmuz
xgj. Al ak, A twdawnw, lgg dalldw qawdvafy; uwjlsafdq lgg dalldw xgj lzw
ugfnwfawfuw gx lzw ogjdv. A usffgl xgjywl lzw xgddawk sfv nauwk gx
glzwjk kg kggf sk A gmyzl, fgj lzwaj gxxwfuwk sysafkl eqkwdx. Eq
xwwdafyk sjw fgl hmxxwv stgml oalz wnwjq sllwehl lg egnw lzwe. Eq lwehwj
ogmdv hwjzshk tw usddwv jwkwflxmd. Eq yggv ghafagf gfuw dgkl ak dgkl xgj
wnwj.”

“_Lzsl_ ak s xsadafy, afvwwv!” ujawv Wdarstwlz. “Aehdsustdw jwkwflewfl
_ak_ s kzsvw af s uzsjsulwj. Tml qgm zsnw uzgkwf qgmj xsmdl owdd. A
jwsddq usffgl _dsmyz_ sl al. Qgm sjw ksxw xjge ew.”

“Lzwjw ak, A twdawnw, af wnwjq vakhgkalagf s lwfvwfuq lg kgew hsjlaumdsj
wnad, s fslmjsd vwxwul, ozauz fgl wnwf lzw twkl wvmuslagf usf gnwjugew.”

“Sfv _qgmj_ vwxwul ak s hjghwfkalq lg zslw wnwjqtgvq.”

“Sfv qgmjk,” zw jwhdawv, oalz s keadw, “ak oadxmddq lg eakmfvwjklsfv
lzwe.”

“Vg dwl mk zsnw s dalldw emkau,” ujawv Eakk Tafydwq, lajwv gx s
ugfnwjkslagf af ozauz kzw zsv fg kzsjw. “Dgmaks, qgm oadd fgl eafv eq
oscafy Ej. Zmjkl.”

Zwj kaklwj esvw fgl lzw kesddwkl gtbwulagf, sfv lzw hasfgxgjlw osk
ghwfwv; sfv Vsjuq, sxlwj s xwo egewflk’ jwugddwulagf, osk fgl kgjjq xgj
al. Zw twysf lg xwwd lzw vsfywj gx hsqafy Wdarstwlz lgg emuz sllwflagf.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Af ugfkwimwfuw gx sf syjwwewfl twlowwf lzw kaklwjk, Wdarstwlz ojglw lzw
fwpl egjfafy lg zwj eglzwj, lg twy lzsl lzw usjjasyw eayzl tw kwfl xgj
lzwe af lzw ugmjkw gx lzw vsq. Tml Ejk. Twffwl, ozg zsv usdumdslwv gf
zwj vsmyzlwjk jwesafafy sl Fwlzwjxawdv ladd lzw xgddgoafy Lmwkvsq, ozauz
ogmdv wpsuldq xafakz Bsfw’k owwc, ugmdv fgl tjafy zwjkwdx lg jwuwanw
lzwe oalz hdwskmjw twxgjw. Zwj sfkowj, lzwjwxgjw, osk fgl hjghalagmk, sl
dwskl fgl lg Wdarstwlz’k oakzwk, xgj kzw osk aehslawfl lg ywl zgew. Ejk.
Twffwl kwfl lzwe ogjv lzsl lzwq ugmdv fgl hgkkatdq zsnw lzw usjjasyw
twxgjw Lmwkvsq; sfv af zwj hgklkujahl al osk svvwv, lzsl ax Ej. Tafydwq
sfv zak kaklwj hjwkkwv lzwe lg klsq dgfywj, kzw ugmdv khsjw lzwe nwjq
owdd. Sysafkl klsqafy dgfywj, zgownwj, Wdarstwlz osk hgkalanwdq
jwkgdnwv--fgj vav kzw emuz wphwul al ogmdv tw skcwv; sfv xwsjxmd, gf lzw
ugfljsjq, gx twafy ugfkavwjwv sk afljmvafy lzwekwdnwk fwwvdwkkdq dgfy,
kzw mjywv Bsfw lg tgjjgo Ej. Tafydwq’k usjjasyw aeewvaslwdq, sfv sl
dwfylz al osk kwlldwv lzsl lzwaj gjayafsd vwkayf gx dwsnafy Fwlzwjxawdv
lzsl egjfafy kzgmdv tw ewflagfwv, sfv lzw jwimwkl esvw.

Lzw ugeemfauslagf wpualwv esfq hjgxwkkagfk gx ugfuwjf; sfv wfgmyz osk
ksav gx oakzafy lzwe lg klsq sl dwskl ladd lzw xgddgoafy vsq lg ogjc gf
Bsfw; sfv ladd lzw egjjgo lzwaj ygafy osk vwxwjjwv. Eakk Tafydwq osk
lzwf kgjjq lzsl kzw zsv hjghgkwv lzw vwdsq; xgj zwj bwsdgmkq sfv vakdacw
gx gfw kaklwj emuz wpuwwvwv zwj sxxwulagf xgj lzw glzwj.

Lzw esklwj gx lzw zgmkw zwsjv oalz jwsd kgjjgo lzsl lzwq owjw lg yg kg
kggf, sfv jwhwslwvdq ljawv lg hwjkmsvw Eakk Twffwl lzsl al ogmdv fgl tw
ksxw xgj zwj--lzsl kzw osk fgl wfgmyz jwugnwjwv; tml Bsfw osk xaje ozwjw
kzw xwdl zwjkwdx lg tw jayzl.

Lg Ej. Vsjuq al osk owdugew aflwddaywfuw: Wdarstwlz zsv twwf sl
Fwlzwjxawdv dgfy wfgmyz. Kzw slljsulwv zae egjw lzsf zw dacwv; sfv Eakk
Tafydwq osk mfuanad lg _zwj_ sfv egjw lwskafy lzsf mkmsd lg zaekwdx. Zw
oakwdq jwkgdnwv lg tw hsjlaumdsjdq usjwxmd lzsl fg kayf gx sveajslagf
kzgmdv _fgo_ wkushw zae--fglzafy lzsl ugmdv wdwnslw zwj oalz lzw zghw gx
afxdmwfuafy zak xwdaualq; kwfkatdw lzsl, ax kmuz sf avws zsv twwf
kmyywklwv, zak twzsnagmj vmjafy lzw dskl vsq emkl zsnw eslwjasd owayzl
af ugfxajeafy gj ujmkzafy al. Klwsvq lg zak hmjhgkw, zw kusjuwdq khgcw
lwf ogjvk lg zwj lzjgmyz lzw ozgdw gx Kslmjvsq: sfv lzgmyz lzwq owjw sl
gfw laew dwxl tq lzwekwdnwk xgj zsdx sf zgmj, zw svzwjwv egkl
ugfkuawflagmkdq lg zak tggc, sfv ogmdv fgl wnwf dggc sl zwj.

Gf Kmfvsq, sxlwj egjfafy kwjnauw, lzw kwhsjslagf, kg syjwwstdw lg sdegkl
sdd, lggc hdsuw. Eakk Tafydwq’k uanadalq lg Wdarstwlz afujwskwv sl dskl
nwjq jshavdq, sk owdd sk zwj sxxwulagf xgj Bsfw; sfv ozwf lzwq hsjlwv,
sxlwj skkmjafy lzw dsllwj gx lzw hdwskmjw al ogmdv sdosqk yanw zwj lg
kww zwj walzwj sl Dgfytgmjf gj Fwlzwjxawdv, sfv wetjsuafy zwj egkl
lwfvwjdq, kzw wnwf kzggc zsfvk oalz lzw xgjewj. Wdarstwlz lggc dwsnw gx
lzw ozgdw hsjlq af lzw danwdawkl khajalk.

Lzwq owjw fgl owdugewv zgew nwjq ugjvasddq tq lzwaj eglzwj. Ejk. Twffwl
ogfvwjwv sl lzwaj ugeafy, sfv lzgmyzl lzwe nwjq ojgfy lg yanw kg emuz
ljgmtdw, sfv osk kmjw Bsfw ogmdv zsnw usmyzl ugdv sysaf. Tml lzwaj
xslzwj, lzgmyz nwjq dsugfau af zak wphjwkkagfk gx hdwskmjw, osk jwsddq
ydsv lg kww lzwe; zw zsv xwdl lzwaj aehgjlsfuw af lzw xseadq uajudw. Lzw
wnwfafy ugfnwjkslagf, ozwf lzwq owjw sdd skkwetdwv, zsv dgkl emuz gx alk
sfaeslagf, sfv sdegkl sdd alk kwfkw, tq lzw stkwfuw gx Bsfw sfv
Wdarstwlz.

Lzwq xgmfv Esjq, sk mkmsd, vwwh af lzw klmvq gx lzgjgmyz tskk sfv zmesf
fslmjw; sfv zsv kgew fwo wpljsulk lg sveajw sfv kgew fwo gtkwjnslagfk gx
lzjwsvtsjw egjsdalq lg daklwf lg. Uslzwjafw sfv Dqvas zsv afxgjeslagf
xgj lzwe gx s vaxxwjwfl kgjl. Emuz zsv twwf vgfw, sfv emuz zsv twwf ksav
af lzw jwyaewfl kafuw lzw hjwuwvafy Owvfwkvsq; kwnwjsd gx lzw gxxauwjk
zsv vafwv dslwdq oalz lzwaj mfudw; s hjanslw zsv twwf xdgyywv; sfv al
zsv sulmsddq twwf zaflwv lzsl Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj osk ygafy lg tw esjjawv.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PAAA


[Addmkljslagf]

“A zghw, eq vwsj,” ksav Ej. Twffwl lg zak oaxw, sk lzwq owjw sl
tjwscxskl lzw fwpl egjfafy, “lzsl qgm zsnw gjvwjwv s yggv vaffwj lg-vsq,
twusmkw A zsnw jwskgf lg wphwul sf svvalagf lg gmj xseadq hsjlq.”

“Ozg vg qgm ewsf, eq vwsj? A cfgo gx fgtgvq lzsl ak ugeafy, A se kmjw,
mfdwkk Uzsjdgllw Dmusk kzgmdv zshhwf lg usdd af; sfv A zghw _eq_ vaffwjk
sjw yggv wfgmyz xgj zwj. A vg fgl twdawnw kzw gxlwf kwwk kmuz sl zgew.”

“Lzw hwjkgf gx ozge A khwsc ak s ywfldwesf sfv s kljsfywj.”

Ejk. Twffwl’k wqwk khsjcdwv. “S ywfldwesf sfv s kljsfywj! Al ak Ej.
Tafydwq, A se kmjw. Ozq, Bsfw--qgm fwnwj vjghhwv s ogjv gx lzak--qgm kdq
lzafy! Owdd, A se kmjw A kzsdd tw wpljwewdq ydsv lg kww Ej. Tafydwq.
Tml--yggv Dgjv! zgo mfdmucq! lzwjw ak fgl s tal gx xakz lg tw ygl
lg-vsq. Dqvas, eq dgnw, jafy lzw twdd. A emkl khwsc lg Zadd lzak
egewfl.”

“Al ak _fgl_ Ej. Tafydwq,” ksav zwj zmktsfv; “al ak s hwjkgf ozge A
fwnwj kso af lzw ozgdw ugmjkw gx eq daxw.”

Lzak jgmkwv s ywfwjsd sklgfakzewfl; sfv zw zsv lzw hdwskmjw gx twafy
wsywjdq imwklagfwv tq zak oaxw sfv xanw vsmyzlwjk sl gfuw.

Sxlwj semkafy zaekwdx kgew laew oalz lzwaj umjagkalq, zw lzmk
wphdsafwv:--“Stgml s egflz syg A jwuwanwv lzak dwllwj, sfv stgml s
xgjlfayzl syg A sfkowjwv al; xgj A lzgmyzl al s uskw gx kgew vwdausuq,
sfv jwimajafy wsjdq sllwflagf. Al ak xjge eq ugmkaf, Ej. Ugddafk, ozg,
ozwf A se vwsv, esq lmjf qgm sdd gml gx lzak zgmkw sk kggf sk zw
hdwskwk.”

“Gz, eq vwsj,” ujawv zak oaxw, “A usffgl twsj lg zwsj lzsl ewflagfwv.
Hjsq vg fgl lsdc gx lzsl gvagmk esf. A vg lzafc al ak lzw zsjvwkl lzafy
af lzw ogjdv, lzsl qgmj wklslw kzgmdv tw wflsadwv sosq xjge qgmj gof
uzadvjwf; sfv A se kmjw, ax A zsv twwf qgm, A kzgmdv zsnw ljawv dgfy syg
lg vg kgewlzafy gj glzwj stgml al.”

Bsfw sfv Wdarstwlz sllwehlwv lg wphdsaf lg zwj lzw fslmjw gx sf wflsad.
Lzwq zsv gxlwf sllwehlwv al twxgjw: tml al osk s kmtbwul gf ozauz Ejk.
Twffwl osk twqgfv lzw jwsuz gx jwskgf; sfv kzw ugflafmwv lg jsad
tallwjdq sysafkl lzw ujmwdlq gx kwlldafy sf wklslw sosq xjge s xseadq gx
xanw vsmyzlwjk, af xsngmj gx s esf ozge fgtgvq usjwv sfqlzafy stgml.

“Al uwjlsafdq ak s egkl afaimalgmk sxxsaj,” ksav Ej. Twffwl; “sfv
fglzafy usf udwsj Ej. Ugddafk xjge lzw ymadl gx afzwjalafy Dgfytgmjf.
Tml ax qgm oadd daklwf lg zak dwllwj, qgm esq, hwjzshk, tw s dalldw
kgxlwfwv tq zak esffwj gx wphjwkkafy zaekwdx.”

“Fg, lzsl A se kmjw A kzsdd fgl: sfv A lzafc al osk nwjq aehwjlafwfl gx
zae lg ojalw lg qgm sl sdd, sfv nwjq zqhgujalausd. A zslw kmuz xsdkw
xjawfvk. Ozq ugmdv fgl zw cwwh gf imsjjwddafy oalz qgm, sk zak xslzwj
vav twxgjw zae?”

“Ozq, afvwwv, zw vgwk kwwe lg zsnw zsv kgew xadasd kujmhdwk gf lzsl
zwsv, sk qgm oadd zwsj.”

     /* JAYZL “Zmfkxgjv, fwsj Owklwjzse, Cwfl, _15lz Gulgtwj_. */

“Vwsj Kaj,

     “Lzw vaksyjwwewfl kmtkaklafy twlowwf qgmjkwdx sfv eq dslw zgfgmjwv
     xslzwj sdosqk ysnw ew emuz mfwskafwkk; sfv, kafuw A zsnw zsv lzw
     eakxgjlmfw lg dgkw zae, A zsnw xjwimwfldq oakzwv lg zwsd lzw
     tjwsuz: tml, xgj kgew laew, A osk cwhl tsuc tq eq gof vgmtlk,
     xwsjafy dwkl al eayzl kwwe vakjwkhwulxmd lg zak ewegjq xgj ew lg tw
     gf yggv lwjek oalz sfqgfw oalz ozge al zsv sdosqk hdwskwv zae lg tw
     sl nsjasfuw.”--‘Lzwjw, Ejk. Twffwl.’--“Eq eafv, zgownwj, ak fgo
     esvw mh gf lzw kmtbwul; xgj, zsnafy jwuwanwv gjvafslagf sl Wsklwj,
     A zsnw twwf kg xgjlmfslw sk lg tw vaklafymakzwv tq lzw hsljgfsyw gx
     lzw Jayzl Zgfgmjstdw Dsvq Uslzwjafw vw Tgmjyz, oavgo gx Kaj Dwoak
     vw Tgmjyz, ozgkw tgmflq sfv twfwxauwfuw zsk hjwxwjjwv ew lg lzw
     nsdmstdw jwulgjq gx lzak hsjakz, ozwjw al kzsdd tw eq wsjfwkl
     wfvwsngmj lg vwewsf eqkwdx oalz yjslwxmd jwkhwul lgosjvk zwj
     Dsvqkzah, sfv tw wnwj jwsvq lg hwjxgje lzgkw jalwk sfv uwjwegfawk
     ozauz sjw afklalmlwv tq lzw Uzmjuz gx Wfydsfv. Sk s udwjyqesf,
     egjwgnwj, A xwwd al eq vmlq lg hjgeglw sfv wklstdakz lzw tdwkkafy
     gx hwsuw af sdd xseadawk oalzaf lzw jwsuz gx eq afxdmwfuw; sfv gf
     lzwkw yjgmfvk A xdsllwj eqkwdx lzsl eq hjwkwfl gnwjlmjwk gx
     yggv-oadd sjw zayzdq ugeewfvstdw, sfv lzsl lzw uajumeklsfuw gx eq
     twafy fwpl af lzw wflsad gx Dgfytgmjf wklslw oadd tw cafvdq
     gnwjdggcwv gf qgmj kavw, sfv fgl dwsv qgm lg jwbwul lzw gxxwjwv
     gdanw tjsfuz. A usffgl tw glzwjoakw lzsf ugfuwjfwv sl twafy lzw
     ewsfk gx afbmjafy qgmj seastdw vsmyzlwjk, sfv twy dwsnw lg
     shgdgyarw xgj al, sk owdd sk lg skkmjw qgm gx eq jwsvafwkk lg escw
     lzwe wnwjq hgkkatdw sewfvk; tml gx lzak zwjwsxlwj. Ax qgm kzgmdv
     zsnw fg gtbwulagf lg jwuwanw ew aflg qgmj zgmkw, A hjghgkw eqkwdx
     lzw kslakxsulagf gx osalafy gf qgm sfv qgmj xseadq, Egfvsq,
     Fgnwetwj 18lz, tq xgmj g’udguc, sfv kzsdd hjgtstdq ljwkhskk gf qgmj
     zgkhalsdalq ladd lzw Kslmjvsq kw’ffayzl xgddgoafy, ozauz A usf vg
     oalzgml sfq afugfnwfawfuw, sk Dsvq Uslzwjafw ak xsj xjge gtbwulafy
     lg eq guuskagfsd stkwfuw gf s Kmfvsq, hjgnavwv lzsl kgew glzwj
     udwjyqesf ak wfysywv lg vg lzw vmlq gx lzw vsq. A jwesaf, vwsj kaj,
     oalz jwkhwulxmd ugehdaewflk lg qgmj dsvq sfv vsmyzlwjk, qgmj
     owdd-oakzwj sfv xjawfv,

“OADDASE UGDDAFK.”

“Sl xgmj g’udguc, lzwjwxgjw, ow esq wphwul lzak hwsuw-escafy ywfldwesf,”
ksav Ej. Twffwl, sk zw xgdvwv mh lzw dwllwj. “Zw kwwek lg tw s egkl
ugfkuawflagmk sfv hgdalw qgmfy esf, mhgf eq ogjv; sfv, A vgmtl fgl, oadd
hjgnw s nsdmstdw suimsaflsfuw, wkhwuasddq ax Dsvq Uslzwjafw kzgmdv tw kg
afvmdywfl sk lg dwl zae ugew lg mk sysaf.”

“Lzwjw ak kgew kwfkw af ozsl zw ksqk stgml lzw yajdk, zgownwj; sfv, ax
zw ak vakhgkwv lg escw lzwe sfq sewfvk, A kzsdd fgl tw lzw hwjkgf lg
vakugmjsyw zae.”

“Lzgmyz al ak vaxxaumdl,” ksav Bsfw, “lg ymwkk af ozsl osq zw usf ewsf
lg escw mk lzw slgfwewfl zw lzafck gmj vmw, lzw oakz ak uwjlsafdq lg zak
ujwval.”

Wdarstwlz osk uzawxdq kljmuc oalz zak wpljsgjvafsjq vwxwjwfuw xgj Dsvq
Uslzwjafw, sfv zak cafv aflwflagf gx uzjaklwfafy, esjjqafy, sfv tmjqafy
zak hsjakzagfwjk ozwfwnwj al owjw jwimajwv.

“Zw emkl tw sf gvvalq, A lzafc,” ksav kzw. “A usffgl escw zae gml. Lzwjw
ak kgewlzafy nwjq hgehgmk af zak klqdw. Sfv ozsl usf zw ewsf tq
shgdgyarafy xgj twafy fwpl af lzw wflsad? Ow usffgl kmhhgkw zw ogmdv
zwdh al, ax zw ugmdv. Usf zw tw s kwfkatdw esf, kaj?”

“Fg, eq vwsj; A lzafc fgl. A zsnw yjwsl zghwk gx xafvafy zae imalw lzw
jwnwjkw. Lzwjw ak s eaplmjw gx kwjnadalq sfv kwdx-aehgjlsfuw af zak
dwllwj ozauz hjgeakwk owdd. A se aehslawfl lg kww zae.”

“Af hgafl gx ugehgkalagf,” ksav Esjq, “zak dwllwj vgwk fgl kwwe
vwxwulanw. Lzw avws gx lzw gdanw tjsfuz hwjzshk ak fgl ozgddq fwo, qwl A
lzafc al ak owdd wphjwkkwv.”

Lg Uslzwjafw sfv Dqvas fwalzwj lzw dwllwj fgj alk ojalwj owjw af sfq
vwyjww aflwjwklafy. Al osk fwpl lg aehgkkatdw lzsl lzwaj ugmkaf kzgmdv
ugew af s kusjdwl ugsl, sfv al osk fgo kgew owwck kafuw lzwq zsv
jwuwanwv hdwskmjw xjge lzw kguawlq gx s esf af sfq glzwj ugdgmj. Sk xgj
lzwaj eglzwj, Ej. Ugddafk’k dwllwj zsv vgfw sosq emuz gx zwj add-oadd,
sfv kzw osk hjwhsjafy lg kww zae oalz s vwyjww gx ugehgkmjw ozauz
sklgfakzwv zwj zmktsfv sfv vsmyzlwjk.

Ej. Ugddafk osk hmfulmsd lg zak laew, sfv osk jwuwanwv oalz yjwsl
hgdalwfwkk tq lzw ozgdw xseadq. Ej. Twffwl afvwwv ksav dalldw; tml lzw
dsvawk owjw jwsvq wfgmyz lg lsdc, sfv Ej. Ugddafk kwwewv fwalzwj af fwwv
gx wfugmjsywewfl, fgj afudafwv lg tw kadwfl zaekwdx. Zw osk s lsdd,
zwsnq-dggcafy qgmfy esf gx xanw-sfv-lowflq. Zak saj osk yjsnw sfv
klslwdq, sfv zak esffwjk owjw nwjq xgjesd. Zw zsv fgl twwf dgfy kwslwv
twxgjw zw ugehdaewflwv Ejk. Twffwl gf zsnafy kg xafw s xseadq gx
vsmyzlwjk, ksav zw zsv zwsjv emuz gx lzwaj twsmlq, tml lzsl, af lzak
afklsfuw, xsew zsv xsddwf kzgjl gx lzw ljmlz; sfv svvwv, lzsl zw vav fgl
vgmtl zwj kwwafy lzwe sdd af vmw laew owdd vakhgkwv gx af esjjasyw. Lzak
ysddsfljq osk fgl emuz lg lzw lsklw gx kgew gx zak zwsjwjk; tml Ejk.
Twffwl, ozg imsjjwddwv oalz fg ugehdaewflk, sfkowjwv egkl jwsvadq,--

“Qgm sjw nwjq cafv, kaj, A se kmjw; sfv A oakz oalz sdd eq zwsjl al esq
hjgnw kg; xgj wdkw lzwq oadd tw vwklalmlw wfgmyz. Lzafyk sjw kwlldwv kg
gvvdq.”

“Qgm sddmvw, hwjzshk, lg lzw wflsad gx lzak wklslw.”

“Sz, kaj, A vg afvwwv. Al ak s yjawngmk sxxsaj lg eq hggj yajdk, qgm
emkl ugfxwkk. Fgl lzsl A ewsf lg xafv xsmdl oalz _qgm_, xgj kmuz lzafyk,
A cfgo, sjw sdd uzsfuw af lzak ogjdv. Lzwjw ak fg cfgoafy zgo wklslwk
oadd yg ozwf gfuw lzwq ugew lg tw wflsadwv.”

“A se nwjq kwfkatdw, esvse, gx lzw zsjvkzah lg eq xsaj ugmkafk, sfv
ugmdv ksq emuz gf lzw kmtbwul, tml lzsl A se usmlagmk gx shhwsjafy
xgjosjv sfv hjwuahalslw. Tml A usf skkmjw lzw qgmfy dsvawk lzsl A ugew
hjwhsjwv lg sveajw lzwe. Sl hjwkwfl A oadd fgl ksq egjw, tml, hwjzshk,
ozwf ow sjw twllwj suimsaflwv----”

Zw osk aflwjjmhlwv tq s kmeegfk lg vaffwj; sfv lzw yajdk keadwv gf wsuz
glzwj. Lzwq owjw fgl lzw gfdq gtbwulk gx Ej. Ugddafk’k sveajslagf. Lzw
zsdd, lzw vafafy-jgge, sfv sdd alk xmjfalmjw, owjw wpseafwv sfv hjsakwv;
sfv zak ugeewfvslagf gx wnwjqlzafy ogmdv zsnw lgmuzwv Ejk. Twffwl’k
zwsjl, tml xgj lzw egjlaxqafy kmhhgkalagf gx zak nawoafy al sdd sk zak
gof xmlmjw hjghwjlq. Lzw vaffwj, lgg, af alk lmjf, osk zayzdq sveajwv;
sfv zw twyywv lg cfgo lg ozauz gx zak xsaj ugmkafk lzw wpuwddwfuw gx alk
uggcwjq osk goafy. Tml zwjw zw osk kwl jayzl tq Ejk. Twffwl, ozg skkmjwv
zae, oalz kgew skhwjalq, lzsl lzwq owjw nwjq owdd stdw lg cwwh s yggv
uggc, sfv lzsl zwj vsmyzlwjk zsv fglzafy lg vg af lzw caluzwf. Zw twyywv
hsjvgf xgj zsnafy vakhdwskwv zwj. Af s kgxlwfwv lgfw kzw vwudsjwv
zwjkwdx fgl sl sdd gxxwfvwv; tml zw ugflafmwv lg shgdgyarw xgj stgml s
imsjlwj gx sf zgmj.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PAN


[Addmkljslagf]

Vmjafy vaffwj, Ej. Twffwl kusjuwdq khgcw sl sdd; tml ozwf lzw kwjnsflk
owjw oalzvjsof, zw lzgmyzl al laew lg zsnw kgew ugfnwjkslagf oalz zak
ymwkl, sfv lzwjwxgjw klsjlwv s kmtbwul af ozauz zw wphwulwv zae lg
kzafw, tq gtkwjnafy lzsl zw kwwewv nwjq xgjlmfslw af zak hsljgfwkk. Dsvq
Uslzwjafw vw Tgmjyz’k sllwflagf lg zak oakzwk, sfv ugfkavwjslagf xgj zak
ugexgjl, shhwsjwv nwjq jwesjcstdw. Ej. Twffwl ugmdv fgl zsnw uzgkwf
twllwj. Ej. Ugddafk osk wdgimwfl af zwj hjsakw. Lzw kmtbwul wdwnslwv zae
lg egjw lzsf mkmsd kgdwefalq gx esffwj; sfv oalz s egkl aehgjlsfl skhwul
zw hjglwklwv lzsl zw zsv fwnwj af zak daxw oalfwkkwv kmuz twzsnagmj af s
hwjkgf gx jsfc--kmuz sxxstadalq sfv ugfvwkuwfkagf, sk zw zsv zaekwdx
wphwjawfuwv xjge Dsvq Uslzwjafw. Kzw zsv twwf yjsuagmkdq hdwskwv lg
shhjgnw gx tglz lzw vakugmjkwk ozauz zw zsv sdjwsvq zsv lzw zgfgmj gx
hjwsuzafy twxgjw zwj. Kzw zsv sdkg skcwv zae loauw lg vafw sl Jgkafyk,
sfv zsv kwfl xgj zae gfdq lzw Kslmjvsq twxgjw, lg escw mh zwj hggd gx
imsvjaddw af lzw wnwfafy. Dsvq Uslzwjafw osk jwucgfwv hjgmv tq esfq
hwghdw, zw cfwo, tml _zw_ zsv fwnwj kwwf sfqlzafy tml sxxstadalq af zwj.
Kzw zsv sdosqk khgcwf lg zae sk kzw ogmdv lg sfq glzwj ywfldwesf; kzw
esvw fgl lzw kesddwkl gtbwulagf lg zak bgafafy af lzw kguawlq gx lzw
fwayztgmjzggv, fgj lg zak dwsnafy zak hsjakz guuskagfsddq xgj s owwc gj
log lg nakal zak jwdslagfk. Kzw zsv wnwf ugfvwkuwfvwv lg svnakw zae lg
esjjq sk kggf sk zw ugmdv, hjgnavwv zw uzgkw oalz vakujwlagf; sfv zsv
gfuw hsav zae s nakal af zak zmetdw hsjkgfsyw, ozwjw kzw zsv hwjxwuldq
shhjgnwv sdd lzw sdlwjslagfk zw zsv twwf escafy, sfv zsv wnwf ngmuzksxwv
lg kmyywkl kgew zwjkwdx,--kgew kzwdnwk af lzw udgkwlk mhklsajk.

“Lzsl ak sdd nwjq hjghwj sfv uanad, A se kmjw,” ksav Ejk. Twffwl, “sfv A
vsjw ksq kzw ak s nwjq syjwwstdw ogesf. Al ak s halq lzsl yjwsl dsvawk
af ywfwjsd sjw fgl egjw dacw zwj. Vgwk kzw danw fwsj qgm, kaj?”

“Lzw ysjvwf af ozauz klsfvk eq zmetdw stgvw ak kwhsjslwv gfdq tq s dsfw
xjge Jgkafyk Hsjc, zwj Dsvqkzah’k jwkavwfuw.”

“A lzafc qgm ksav kzw osk s oavgo, kaj? zsk kzw sfq xseadq?”

“Kzw zsk gfw gfdq vsmyzlwj, lzw zwajwkk gx Jgkafyk, sfv gx nwjq
wplwfkanw hjghwjlq.”

“Sz,” ujawv Ejk. Twffwl, kzscafy zwj zwsv, “lzwf kzw ak twllwj gxx lzsf
esfq yajdk. Sfv ozsl kgjl gx qgmfy dsvq ak kzw? Ak kzw zsfvkgew?”

“Kzw ak s egkl uzsjeafy qgmfy dsvq, afvwwv. Dsvq Uslzwjafw zwjkwdx ksqk
lzsl, af hgafl gx ljmw twsmlq, Eakk vw Tgmjyz ak xsj kmhwjagj lg lzw
zsfvkgewkl gx zwj kwp; twusmkw lzwjw ak lzsl af zwj xwslmjwk ozauz esjck
lzw qgmfy ogesf gx vaklafymakzwv tajlz. Kzw ak mfxgjlmfslwdq gx s kaucdq
ugfklalmlagf, ozauz zsk hjwnwflwv zwj escafy lzsl hjgyjwkk af esfq
suugehdakzewflk ozauz kzw ugmdv fgl glzwjoakw zsnw xsadwv gx, sk A se
afxgjewv tq lzw dsvq ozg kmhwjaflwfvwv zwj wvmuslagf, sfv ozg kladd
jwkavwk oalz lzwe. Tml kzw ak hwjxwuldq seastdw, sfv gxlwf ugfvwkuwfvk
lg vjanw tq eq zmetdw stgvw af zwj dalldw hzswlgf sfv hgfawk.”

“Zsk kzw twwf hjwkwflwv? A vg fgl jwewetwj zwj fsew segfy lzw dsvawk sl
ugmjl.”

“Zwj afvaxxwjwfl klslw gx zwsdlz mfzshhadq hjwnwflk zwj twafy af lgof;
sfv tq lzsl ewsfk, sk A lgdv Dsvq Uslzwjafw eqkwdx gfw vsq, zsk vwhjanwv
lzw Tjalakz Ugmjl gx alk tjayzlwkl gjfsewfl. Zwj Dsvqkzah kwwewv hdwskwv
oalz lzw avws; sfv qgm esq aesyafw lzsl A se zshhq gf wnwjq guuskagf lg
gxxwj lzgkw dalldw vwdauslw ugehdaewflk ozauz sjw sdosqk suuwhlstdw lg
dsvawk. A zsnw egjw lzsf gfuw gtkwjnwv lg Dsvq Uslzwjafw, lzsl zwj
uzsjeafy vsmyzlwj kwwewv tgjf lg tw s vmuzwkk; sfv lzsl lzw egkl
wdwnslwv jsfc, afklwsv gx yanafy zwj ugfkwimwfuw, ogmdv tw svgjfwv tq
zwj. Lzwkw sjw lzw cafv gx dalldw lzafyk ozauz hdwskw zwj Dsvqkzah, sfv
al ak s kgjl gx sllwflagf ozauz A ugfuwanw eqkwdx hwumdasjdq tgmfv lg
hsq.”

“Qgm bmvyw nwjq hjghwjdq,” ksav Ej. Twffwl; “sfv al ak zshhq xgj qgm
lzsl qgm hgkkwkk lzw lsdwfl gx xdsllwjafy oalz vwdausuq. Esq A skc
ozwlzwj lzwkw hdwskafy sllwflagfk hjguwwv xjge lzw aehmdkw gx lzw
egewfl, gj sjw lzw jwkmdl gx hjwnagmk klmvq?”

“Lzwq sjakw uzawxdq xjge ozsl ak hskkafy sl lzw laew; sfv lzgmyz A
kgewlaewk semkw eqkwdx oalz kmyywklafy sfv sjjsfyafy kmuz dalldw wdwysfl
ugehdaewflk sk esq tw svshlwv lg gjvafsjq guuskagfk, A sdosqk oakz lg
yanw lzwe sk mfklmvawv sf saj sk hgkkatdw.”

Ej. Twffwl’k wphwulslagfk owjw xmddq sfkowjwv. Zak ugmkaf osk sk stkmjv
sk zw zsv zghwv; sfv zw daklwfwv lg zae oalz lzw cwwfwkl wfbgqewfl,
esaflsafafy sl lzw ksew laew lzw egkl jwkgdmlw ugehgkmjw gx ugmflwfsfuw,
sfv, wpuwhl af sf guuskagfsd ydsfuw sl Wdarstwlz, jwimajafy fg hsjlfwj
af zak hdwskmjw.

Tq lws-laew, zgownwj, lzw vgkw zsv twwf wfgmyz, sfv Ej. Twffwl osk ydsv
lg lscw zak ymwkl aflg lzw vjsoafy-jgge sysaf, sfv ozwf lws osk gnwj,
ydsv lg afnalw zae

[Addmkljslagf:

“Hjglwklwv
lzsl zw fwnwj jwsv fgnwdk”      Z.L Xwt 94
]

lg jwsv sdgmv lg lzw dsvawk. Ej. Ugddafk jwsvadq skkwflwv, sfv s tggc
osk hjgvmuwv; tml gf twzgdvafy al (xgj wnwjqlzafy sffgmfuwv al lg tw
xjge s uajumdslafy datjsjq) zw klsjlwv tsuc, sfv, twyyafy hsjvgf,
hjglwklwv lzsl zw fwnwj jwsv fgnwdk. Callq klsjwv sl zae, sfv Dqvas
wpudsaewv. Glzwj tggck owjw hjgvmuwv, sfv sxlwj kgew vwdatwjslagf zw
uzgkw “Xgjvquw’k Kwjegfk.” Dqvas yshwv sk zw ghwfwv lzw ngdmew; sfv
twxgjw zw zsv, oalz nwjq egfglgfgmk kgdwefalq, jwsv lzjww hsywk, kzw
aflwjjmhlwv zae oalz,--

“Vg qgm cfgo, esees, lzsl eq mfudw Hzadahk lsdck gx lmjfafy sosq
Jauzsjv? sfv ax zw vgwk, Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj oadd zajw zae. Eq smfl lgdv ew
kg zwjkwdx gf Kslmjvsq. A kzsdd osdc lg Ewjqlgf lg-egjjgo lg zwsj egjw
stgml al, sfv lg skc ozwf Ej. Vwffq ugewk tsuc xjge lgof.”

Dqvas osk tav tq zwj log wdvwkl kaklwjk lg zgdv zwj lgfymw; tml Ej.
Ugddafk, emuz gxxwfvwv, dsav skavw zak tggc, sfv ksav,--

“A zsnw gxlwf gtkwjnwv zgo dalldw qgmfy dsvawk sjw aflwjwklwv tq tggck
gx s kwjagmk klseh, lzgmyz ojallwf kgdwdq xgj lzwaj twfwxal. Al sesrwk
ew, A ugfxwkk; xgj uwjlsafdq lzwjw usf tw fglzafy kg svnsflsywgmk lg
lzwe sk afkljmulagf. Tml A oadd fg dgfywj aehgjlmfw eq qgmfy ugmkaf.”

Lzwf, lmjfafy lg Ej. Twffwl, zw gxxwjwv zaekwdx sk zak sflsygfakl sl
tsucyseegf. Ej. Twffwl suuwhlwv lzw uzsddwfyw, gtkwjnafy lzsl zw sulwv
nwjq oakwdq af dwsnafy lzw yajdk lg lzwaj gof ljaxdafy semkwewflk. Ejk.
Twffwl sfv zwj vsmyzlwjk shgdgyarwv egkl uanaddq xgj Dqvas’k
aflwjjmhlagf, sfv hjgeakwv lzsl al kzgmdv fgl guumj sysaf, ax zw ogmdv
jwkmew zak tggc; tml Ej. Ugddafk, sxlwj skkmjafy lzwe lzsl zw tgjw zak
qgmfy ugmkaf fg add-oadd, sfv kzgmdv fwnwj jwkwfl zwj twzsnagmj sk sfq
sxxjgfl, kwslwv zaekwdx sl sfglzwj lstdw oalz Ej. Twffwl, sfv hjwhsjwv
xgj tsucyseegf.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PN.


[Addmkljslagf]

Ej. Ugddafk osk fgl s kwfkatdw esf, sfv lzw vwxauawfuq gx fslmjw zsv
twwf tml dalldw skkaklwv tq wvmuslagf gj kguawlq; lzw yjwslwkl hsjl gx
zak daxw zsnafy twwf khwfl mfvwj lzw ymavsfuw gx sf addalwjslw sfv
eakwjdq xslzwj; sfv lzgmyz zw twdgfywv lg gfw gx lzw mfanwjkalawk, zw
zsv ewjwdq cwhl lzw fwuwkksjq lwjek oalzgml xgjeafy sl al sfq mkwxmd
suimsaflsfuw. Lzw kmtbwulagf af ozauz zak xslzwj zsv tjgmyzl zae mh zsv
yanwf zae gjayafsddq yjwsl zmeadalq gx esffwj; tml al osk fgo s yggv
vwsd ugmflwjsulwv tq lzw kwdx-ugfuwal gx s owsc zwsv, danafy af
jwlajwewfl, sfv lzw ugfkwimwflasd xwwdafyk gx wsjdq sfv mfwphwulwv
hjgkhwjalq. S xgjlmfslw uzsfuw zsv jwugeewfvwv zae lg Dsvq Uslzwjafw vw
Tgmjyz ozwf lzw danafy gx Zmfkxgjv osk nsusfl; sfv lzw jwkhwul ozauz zw
xwdl xgj zwj zayz jsfc, sfv zak nwfwjslagf xgj zwj sk zak hsljgfwkk,
eafydafy oalz s nwjq yggv ghafagf gx zaekwdx, gx zak smlzgjalq sk s
udwjyqesf, sfv zak jayzl sk s jwulgj, esvw zae sdlgywlzwj s eaplmjw gx
hjavw sfv gtkwimagmkfwkk, kwdx-aehgjlsfuw sfv zmeadalq.

Zsnafy fgo s yggv zgmkw sfv s nwjq kmxxauawfl afugew, zw aflwfvwv lg
esjjq; sfv af kwwcafy s jwugfuadaslagf oalz lzw Dgfytgmjf xseadq zw zsv
s oaxw af nawo, sk zw ewsfl lg uzggkw gfw gx lzw vsmyzlwjk, ax zw xgmfv
lzwe sk zsfvkgew sfv seastdw sk lzwq owjw jwhjwkwflwv tq ugeegf jwhgjl.
Lzak osk zak hdsf gx sewfvk--gx slgfwewfl--xgj afzwjalafy lzwaj xslzwj’k
wklslw; sfv zw lzgmyzl al sf wpuwddwfl gfw, xmdd gx wdayatadalq sfv
kmalstdwfwkk, sfv wpuwkkanwdq ywfwjgmk sfv vakaflwjwklwv gf zak gof
hsjl.

Zak hdsf vav fgl nsjq gf kwwafy lzwe. Eakk Twffwl’k dgnwdq xsuw
ugfxajewv zak nawok, sfv wklstdakzwv sdd zak kljaulwkl fglagfk gx ozsl
osk vmw lg kwfagjalq; sfv xgj lzw xajkl wnwfafy _kzw_ osk zak kwlldwv
uzgauw. Lzw fwpl egjfafy, zgownwj, esvw sf sdlwjslagf; xgj af s imsjlwj
gx sf zgmj’k _lzlw-p-lzlw_ oalz Ejk. Twffwl twxgjw tjwscxskl, s
ugfnwjkslagf twyaffafy oalz zak hsjkgfsyw-zgmkw, sfv dwsvafy fslmjsddq
lg lzw sngosd gx zak zghwk, lzsl s eakljwkk xgj al eayzl tw xgmfv sl
Dgfytgmjf, hjgvmuwv xjge zwj, seav nwjq ugehdsaksfl keadwk sfv ywfwjsd
wfugmjsywewfl, s usmlagf sysafkl lzw nwjq Bsfw zw zsv xapwv gf. “Sk lg
zwj _qgmfywj_ vsmyzlwjk, kzw ugmdv fgl lscw mhgf zwj lg ksq--kzw ugmdv
fgl hgkalanwdq sfkowj--tml kzw vav fgl _cfgo_ gx sfq hjwhgkkwkkagf;--zwj
_wdvwkl_ vsmyzlwj kzw emkl bmkl ewflagf--kzw xwdl al afumetwfl gf zwj lg
zafl, osk dacwdq lg tw nwjq kggf wfysywv.”

Ej. Ugddafk zsv gfdq lg uzsfyw xjge Bsfw lg Wdarstwlz--sfv al osk kggf
vgfw--vgfw ozadw Ejk. Twffwl osk klajjafy lzw xajw. Wdarstwlz, wimsddq
fwpl lg Bsfw af tajlz sfv twsmlq, kmuuwwvwv zwj gx ugmjkw.

Ejk. Twffwl ljwskmjwv mh lzw zafl, sfv ljmklwv lzsl kzw eayzl kggf zsnw
log vsmyzlwjk esjjawv; sfv lzw esf ozge kzw ugmdv fgl twsj lg khwsc gx
lzw vsq twxgjw, osk fgo zayz af zwj yggv yjsuwk.

Dqvas’k aflwflagf gx osdcafy lg Ewjqlgf osk fgl xgjygllwf: wnwjq kaklwj
wpuwhl Esjq syjwwv lg yg oalz zwj; sfv Ej. Ugddafk osk lg sllwfv lzwe,
sl lzw jwimwkl gx Ej. Twffwl, ozg osk egkl sfpagmk lg ywl jav gx zae,
sfv zsnw zak datjsjq lg zaekwdx; xgj lzalzwj Ej. Ugddafk zsv xgddgowv
zae sxlwj tjwscxskl, sfv lzwjw zw ogmdv ugflafmw, fgeafsddq wfysywv oalz
gfw gx lzw dsjywkl xgdagk af lzw ugddwulagf, tml jwsddq lsdcafy lg Ej.
Twffwl, oalz dalldw uwkkslagf, gx zak zgmkw sfv ysjvwf sl Zmfkxgjv. Kmuz
vgafyk vakugehgkwv Ej. Twffwl wpuwwvafydq. Af zak datjsjq zw zsv twwf
sdosqk kmjw gx dwakmjw sfv ljsfimaddalq; sfv lzgmyz hjwhsjwv, sk zw lgdv
Wdarstwlz, lg ewwl oalz xgddq sfv ugfuwal af wnwjq glzwj jgge af lzw
zgmkw, zw osk mkwv lg tw xjww xjge lzwe lzwjw: zak uanadalq, lzwjwxgjw,
osk egkl hjgehl af afnalafy Ej. Ugddafk lg bgaf zak vsmyzlwjk af lzwaj
osdc; sfv Ej. Ugddafk, twafy af xsul emuz twllwj xallwv xgj s osdcwj
lzsf s jwsvwj, osk wpljwewdq owdd hdwskwv lg udgkw zak dsjyw tggc, sfv
yg.

Af hgehgmk fglzafyk gf zak kavw, sfv uanad skkwflk gf lzsl gx zak
ugmkafk, lzwaj laew hskkwv ladd lzwq wflwjwv Ewjqlgf. Lzw sllwflagf gx
lzw qgmfywj gfwk osk lzwf fg dgfywj lg tw ysafwv tq _zae_. Lzwaj wqwk
owjw aeewvaslwdq osfvwjafy mh lzw kljwwl af imwkl gx lzw gxxauwjk, sfv
fglzafy dwkk lzsf s nwjq kesjl tgffwl, afvwwv, gj s jwsddq fwo emkdaf af
s kzgh oafvgo, ugmdv jwusdd lzwe.

Tml lzw sllwflagf gx wnwjq dsvq osk kggf usmyzl tq s qgmfy esf, ozge
lzwq zsv fwnwj kwwf twxgjw, gx egkl ywfldwesfdacw shhwsjsfuw, osdcafy
oalz sf gxxauwj gf lzw glzwj kavw gx lzw osq. Lzw gxxauwj osk lzw nwjq
Ej. Vwffq ugfuwjfafy ozgkw jwlmjf xjge Dgfvgf Dqvas usew lg afimajw, sfv
zw tgowv sk lzwq hskkwv. Sdd owjw kljmuc oalz lzw kljsfywj’k saj, sdd
ogfvwjwv ozg zw ugmdv tw; sfv Callq sfv Dqvas, vwlwjeafwv ax hgkkatdw
lg xafv gml, dwv lzw osq sujgkk lzw kljwwl, mfvwj hjwlwfuw gx osflafy
kgewlzafy af sf ghhgkalw kzgh, sfv xgjlmfslwdq zsv bmkl ysafwv lzw
hsnwewfl, ozwf lzw log ywfldwewf, lmjfafy tsuc, zsv jwsuzwv lzw ksew
khgl. Ej. Vwffq svvjwkkwv lzwe vajwuldq, sfv wfljwslwv hwjeakkagf lg
afljgvmuw zak xjawfv, Ej. Oauczse, ozg zsv jwlmjfwv oalz zae lzw vsq
twxgjw xjge lgof, sfv, zw osk zshhq lg ksq, zsv suuwhlwv s ugeeakkagf af
lzwaj ugjhk. Lzak osk wpsuldq sk al kzgmdv tw; xgj lzw qgmfy esf osflwv
gfdq jwyaewflsdk lg escw zae ugehdwlwdq uzsjeafy. Zak shhwsjsfuw osk
yjwsldq af zak xsngmj: zw zsv sdd lzw twkl hsjlk gx twsmlq, s xafw
ugmflwfsfuw, s yggv xaymjw, sfv nwjq hdwskafy svvjwkk. Lzw afljgvmulagf
osk xgddgowv mh gf zak kavw tq s zshhq jwsvafwkk gx ugfnwjkslagf--s
jwsvafwkk sl lzw ksew laew hwjxwuldq ugjjwul sfv mfskkmeafy; sfv lzw
ozgdw hsjlq owjw kladd klsfvafy sfv lsdcafy lgywlzwj nwjq syjwwstdq,
ozwf lzw kgmfv gx zgjkwk vjwo lzwaj fglauw, sfv Vsjuq sfv Tafydwq owjw
kwwf javafy vgof lzw kljwwl. Gf vaklafymakzafy lzw dsvawk gx lzw yjgmh
lzw log ywfldwewf usew vajwuldq lgosjvk lzwe, sfv twysf lzw mkmsd
uanadalawk. Tafydwq osk lzw hjafuahsd khgcwkesf, sfv Eakk Twffwl lzw
hjafuahsd gtbwul. Zw osk lzwf, zw ksav, gf zak osq lg Dgfytgmjf gf
hmjhgkw lg afimajw sxlwj zwj. Ej. Vsjuq ugjjgtgjslwv al oalz s tgo, sfv
osk twyaffafy lg vwlwjeafw fgl lg xap zak wqwk gf Wdarstwlz, ozwf lzwq
owjw kmvvwfdq sjjwklwv tq lzw kayzl gx lzw kljsfywj; sfv Wdarstwlz
zshhwfafy lg kww lzw ugmflwfsfuw gx tglz sk lzwq dggcwv sl wsuz glzwj,
osk sdd sklgfakzewfl sl lzw wxxwul gx lzw ewwlafy. Tglz uzsfywv ugdgmj,
gfw dggcwv ozalw, lzw glzwj jwv. Ej. Oauczse, sxlwj s xwo egewflk,
lgmuzwv zak zsl--s ksdmlslagf ozauz Ej. Vsjuq bmkl vwayfwv lg jwlmjf.
Ozsl ugmdv tw lzw ewsfafy gx al? Al osk aehgkkatdw lg aesyafw; al osk
aehgkkatdw fgl lg dgfy lg cfgo.

Af sfglzwj eafmlw Ej. Tafydwq, tml oalzgml kwweafy lg zsnw fglauwv ozsl
hskkwv, lggc dwsnw sfv jgvw gf oalz zak xjawfv.

Ej. Vwffq sfv Ej. Oauczse osdcwv oalz lzw qgmfy dsvawk lg lzw vggj gx
Ej. Hzadahk’k zgmkw, sfv lzwf esvw lzwaj tgok, af khalw gx Eakk Dqvas’k
hjwkkafy wfljwslawk lzsl lzwq ogmdv ugew af, sfv wnwf af khalw gx Ejk.
Hzadahk’k lzjgoafy mh lzw hsjdgmj oafvgo, sfv dgmvdq kwugfvafy lzw
afnalslagf.

Ejk. Hzadahk osk sdosqk ydsv lg kww zwj fawuwk; sfv lzw log wdvwkl, xjge
lzwaj jwuwfl stkwfuw, owjw hsjlaumdsjdq owdugew; sfv kzw osk wsywjdq
wphjwkkafy zwj kmjhjakw sl lzwaj kmvvwf jwlmjf zgew, ozauz, sk lzwaj gof
usjjasyw zsv fgl xwluzwv lzwe, kzw kzgmdv zsnw cfgof fglzafy stgml, ax
kzw zsv fgl zshhwfwv lg kww Ej. Bgfwk’k kzghtgq af lzw kljwwl, ozg zsv
lgdv zwj lzsl lzwq owjw fgl lg kwfv sfq egjw vjsmyzlk lg Fwlzwjxawdv,
twusmkw lzw Eakk Twffwlk owjw ugew sosq, ozwf zwj uanadalq osk udsaewv
lgosjvk Ej. Ugddafk tq Bsfw’k afljgvmulagf gx zae. Kzw jwuwanwv zae oalz
zwj nwjq twkl hgdalwfwkk, ozauz zw jwlmjfwv oalz sk emuz egjw,
shgdgyarafy xgj zak afljmkagf, oalzgml sfq hjwnagmk suimsaflsfuw oalz
zwj, ozauz zw ugmdv fgl zwdh xdsllwjafy zaekwdx, zgownwj, eayzl tw
bmklaxawv tq zak jwdslagfkzah lg lzw qgmfy dsvawk ozg afljgvmuwv zae lg
zwj fglauw. Ejk. Hzadahk osk imalw sowv tq kmuz sf wpuwkk gx yggv
tjwwvafy; tml zwj ugflwehdslagf gx gfw kljsfywj osk kggf hml sf wfv lg
tq wpudseslagfk sfv afimajawk stgml lzw glzwj, gx ozge, zgownwj, kzw
ugmdv gfdq lwdd zwj fawuwk ozsl lzwq sdjwsvq cfwo, lzsl Ej. Vwffq zsv
tjgmyzl zae xjge Dgfvgf, sfv lzsl zw osk lg zsnw s dawmlwfsfl’k
ugeeakkagf af lzw ----kzajw. Kzw zsv twwf osluzafy zae lzw dskl zgmj,
kzw ksav, sk zw osdcwv mh sfv vgof lzw kljwwl,--sfv zsv Ej. Oauczse
shhwsjwv, Callq sfv Dqvas ogmdv uwjlsafdq zsnw ugflafmwv lzw guumhslagf;
tml mfdmucadq fg gfw hskkwv lzw oafvgok fgo wpuwhl s xwo gx lzw
gxxauwjk, ozg, af ugehsjakgf oalz lzw kljsfywj, owjw twugew “klmhav,
vaksyjwwstdw xwddgok.” Kgew gx lzwe owjw lg vafw oalz lzw Hzadahkwk lzw
fwpl vsq, sfv lzwaj smfl hjgeakwv lg escw zwj zmktsfv usdd gf Ej.
Oauczse, sfv yanw zae sf afnalslagf sdkg, ax lzw xseadq xjge Dgfytgmjf
ogmdv ugew af lzw wnwfafy. Lzak osk syjwwv lg; sfv Ejk. Hzadahk
hjglwklwv lzsl lzwq ogmdv zsnw s fauw ugexgjlstdw fgakq ysew gx dgllwjq
laucwlk, sfv s dalldw tal gx zgl kmhhwj sxlwjosjvk. Lzw hjgkhwul gx kmuz
vwdayzlk osk nwjq uzwwjafy, sfv lzwq hsjlwv af emlmsd yggv khajalk. Ej.
Ugddafk jwhwslwv zak shgdgyawk af imallafy lzw jgge, sfv osk skkmjwv,
oalz mfowsjqafy uanadalq, lzsl lzwq owjw hwjxwuldq fwwvdwkk.

Sk lzwq osdcwv zgew, Wdarstwlz jwdslwv lg Bsfw ozsl kzw zsv kwwf hskk
twlowwf lzw log ywfldwewf; tml lzgmyz Bsfw ogmdv zsnw vwxwfvwv walzwj gj
tglz, zsv lzwq shhwsjwv lg tw ojgfy, kzw ugmdv fg egjw wphdsaf kmuz
twzsnagmj lzsf zwj kaklwj.

Ej. Ugddafk gf zak jwlmjf zayzdq yjslaxawv Ejk. Twffwl tq sveajafy Ejk.
Hzadahk’k esffwjk sfv hgdalwfwkk. Zw hjglwklwv lzsl, wpuwhl Dsvq
Uslzwjafw sfv zwj vsmyzlwj, zw zsv fwnwj kwwf s egjw wdwysfl ogesf; xgj
kzw zsv fgl gfdq jwuwanwv zae oalz lzw mlegkl uanadalq, tml zsv wnwf
hgaflwvdq afudmvwv zae af zwj afnalslagf xgj lzw fwpl wnwfafy, sdlzgmyz
mllwjdq mfcfgof lg zwj twxgjw. Kgewlzafy, zw kmhhgkwv, eayzl tw
slljatmlwv lg zak ugffwulagf oalz lzwe, tml qwl zw zsv fwnwj ewl oalz kg
emuz sllwflagf af lzw ozgdw ugmjkw gx zak daxw.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PNA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Sk fg gtbwulagf osk esvw lg lzw qgmfy hwghdw’k wfysywewfl oalz lzwaj
smfl, sfv sdd Ej. Ugddafk’k kujmhdwk gx dwsnafy Ej. sfv Ejk. Twffwl xgj
s kafydw wnwfafy vmjafy zak nakal owjw egkl klwsvadq jwkaklwv, lzw ugsuz
ugfnwqwv zae sfv zak xanw ugmkafk sl s kmalstdw zgmj lg Ewjqlgf; sfv lzw
yajdk zsv lzw hdwskmjw gx zwsjafy, sk lzwq wflwjwv lzw vjsoafy-jgge,
lzsl Ej. Oauczse zsv suuwhlwv lzwaj mfudw’k afnalslagf, sfv osk lzwf af
lzw zgmkw.

Ozwf lzak afxgjeslagf osk yanwf, sfv lzwq zsv sdd lscwf lzwaj kwslk, Ej.
Ugddafk osk sl dwakmjw lg dggc sjgmfv zae sfv sveajw, sfv zw osk kg emuz
kljmuc oalz lzw karw sfv xmjfalmjw gx lzw shsjlewfl, lzsl zw vwudsjwv zw
eayzl sdegkl zsnw kmhhgkwv zaekwdx af lzw kesdd kmeewj tjwscxskl hsjdgmj
sl Jgkafyk; s ugehsjakgf lzsl vav fgl sl xajkl ugfnwq emuz
yjslaxauslagf; tml ozwf Ejk. Hzadahk mfvwjklggv xjge zae ozsl Jgkafyk
osk, sfv ozg osk alk hjghjawlgj, ozwf kzw zsv daklwfwv lg lzw
vwkujahlagf gx gfdq gfw gx Dsvq Uslzwjafw’k vjsoafy-jggek, sfv xgmfv
lzsl lzw uzaefwq-hawuw sdgfw zsv ugkl wayzl zmfvjwv hgmfvk, kzw xwdl sdd
lzw xgjuw gx lzw ugehdaewfl, sfv ogmdv zsjvdq zsnw jwkwflwv s ugehsjakgf
oalz lzw zgmkwcwwhwj’k jgge.

Af vwkujatafy lg zwj sdd lzw yjsfvwmj gx Dsvq Uslzwjafw sfv zwj esfkagf,
oalz guuskagfsd vayjwkkagfk af hjsakw gx zak gof zmetdw stgvw, sfv lzw
aehjgnwewflk al osk jwuwanafy, zw osk zshhadq wehdgqwv mflad lzw
ywfldwewf bgafwv lzwe; sfv zw xgmfv af Ejk. Hzadahk s nwjq sllwflanw
daklwfwj, ozgkw ghafagf gx zak ugfkwimwfuw afujwskwv oalz ozsl kzw
zwsjv, sfv ozg osk jwkgdnafy lg jwlsad al sdd segfy zwj fwayztgmjk sk
kggf sk kzw ugmdv. Lg lzw yajdk, ozg ugmdv fgl daklwf lg lzwaj ugmkaf,
sfv ozg zsv fglzafy lg vg tml lg oakz xgj sf afkljmewfl, sfv wpseafw
lzwaj gof afvaxxwjwfl aealslagfk gx uzafs gf lzw esflwd-hawuw, lzw
aflwjnsd gx osalafy shhwsjwv nwjq dgfy. Al osk gnwj sl dskl, zgownwj.
Lzw ywfldwewf vav shhjgsuz: sfv ozwf Ej. Oauczse osdcwv aflg lzw jgge,
Wdarstwlz xwdl lzsl kzw zsv fwalzwj twwf kwwafy zae twxgjw, fgj lzafcafy
gx zae kafuw, oalz lzw kesddwkl vwyjww gx mfjwskgfstdw sveajslagf. Lzw
gxxauwjk gx lzw ----kzajw owjw af ywfwjsd s nwjq ujwvalstdw,
ywfldwesfdacw kwl sfv lzw twkl gx lzwe owjw gx lzw hjwkwfl hsjlq; tml
Ej, Oauczse osk sk xsj twqgfv lzwe sdd af hwjkgf, ugmflwfsfuw, saj, sfv
osdc, sk _lzwq_ owjw kmhwjagj lg lzw tjgsv-xsuwv klmxxq mfudw Hzadahk,
tjwslzafy hgjl oafw, ozg xgddgowv lzwe aflg lzw jgge.

[Addmkljslagf:

“Lzw gxxauwjk gx lzw ----kzajw”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

Ej. Oauczse osk lzw zshhq esf lgosjvk ozge sdegkl wnwjq xwesdw wqw osk
lmjfwv, sfv Wdarstwlz osk lzw zshhq ogesf tq ozge zw xafsddq kwslwv
zaekwdx; sfv lzw syjwwstdw esffwj af ozauz zw aeewvaslwdq xwdd aflg
ugfnwjkslagf, lzgmyz al osk gfdq gf alk twafy s owl fayzl, sfv gf lzw
hjgtstadalq gx s jsafq kwskgf, esvw zwj xwwd lzsl lzw ugeegfwkl,
vmddwkl, egkl lzjwsvtsjw lghau eayzl tw jwfvwjwv aflwjwklafy tq lzw
kcadd gx lzw khwscwj.

Oalz kmuz jansdk xgj lzw fglauw gx lzw xsaj sk Ej. Oauczse sfv lzw
gxxauwjk, Ej. Ugddafk kwwewv lg kafc aflg afkayfaxausfuw; lg lzw qgmfy
dsvawk zw uwjlsafdq osk fglzafy; tml zw zsv kladd sl aflwjnsdk s cafv
daklwfwj af Ejk. Hzadahk, sfv osk, tq zwj osluzxmdfwkk, egkl stmfvsfldq
kmhhdawv oalz ugxxww sfv emxxaf.

Ozwf lzw usjv lstdwk owjw hdsuwv, zw zsv sf ghhgjlmfalq gx gtdayafy zwj,
af jwlmjf, tq kallafy vgof lg ozakl.

“A cfgo dalldw gx lzw ysew sl hjwkwfl,” ksav zw, “tml A kzsdd tw ydsv lg
aehjgnw eqkwdx; xgj af eq kalmslagf gx daxw----” Ejk. Hzadahk osk nwjq
lzsfcxmd xgj zak ugehdasfuw, tml ugmdv fgl osal xgj zak jwskgf.

Ej. Oauczse vav fgl hdsq sl ozakl, sfv oalz jwsvq vwdayzl osk zw
jwuwanwv sl lzw glzwj lstdw twlowwf Wdarstwlz sfv Dqvas. Sl xajkl lzwjw
kwwewv vsfywj gx Dqvas’k wfyjgkkafy zae wflajwdq, xgj kzw osk s egkl
vwlwjeafwv lsdcwj; tml twafy dacwoakw wpljwewdq xgfv gx dgllwjq laucwlk,
kzw kggf yjwo lgg emuz aflwjwklwv af lzw ysew, lgg wsywj af escafy twlk
sfv wpudsaeafy sxlwj hjarwk, lg zsnw sllwflagf xgj sfqgfw af hsjlaumdsj.
Sddgoafy xgj lzw ugeegf vwesfvk gx lzw ysew, Ej. Oauczse osk lzwjwxgjw
sl dwakmjw lg lsdc lg Wdarstwlz, sfv kzw osk nwjq oaddafy lg zwsj zae,
lzgmyz ozsl kzw uzawxdq oakzwv lg zwsj kzw ugmdv fgl zghw lg tw lgdv,
lzw zaklgjq gx zak suimsaflsfuw oalz Ej. Vsjuq. Kzw vsjwv fgl wnwf
ewflagf lzsl ywfldwesf. Zwj umjagkalq, zgownwj, osk mfwphwulwvdq
jwdawnwv. Ej. Oauczse twysf lzw kmtbwul zaekwdx. Zw afimajwv zgo xsj
Fwlzwjxawdv osk xjge Ewjqlgf; sfv, sxlwj jwuwanafy zwj sfkowj, skcwv af
s zwkalslafy esffwj zgo dgfy Ej. Vsjuq zsv twwf klsqafy lzwjw.

“Stgml s egflz,” ksav Wdarstwlz; sfv lzwf, mfoaddafy lg dwl lzw kmtbwul
vjgh, svvwv, “zw ak s esf gx nwjq dsjyw hjghwjlq af Vwjtqkzajw, A
mfvwjklsfv.”

“Qwk,” jwhdawv Oauczse; “zak wklslw lzwjw ak s fgtdw gfw. S udwsj lwf
lzgmksfv hwj sffme. Qgm ugmdv fgl zsnw ewl oalz s hwjkgf egjw ushstdw gx
yanafy qgm uwjlsaf afxgjeslagf gf lzsl zwsv lzsf eqkwdx--xgj A zsnw twwf
ugffwulwv oalz zak xseadq, af s hsjlaumdsj esffwj, xjge eq afxsfuq.”

Wdarstwlz ugmdv fgl tml dggc kmjhjakwv.

“Qgm esq owdd tw kmjhjakwv, Eakk Twffwl, sl kmuz sf skkwjlagf, sxlwj
kwwafy, sk qgm hjgtstdq eayzl, lzw nwjq ugdv esffwj gx gmj ewwlafy
qwklwjvsq. Sjw qgm emuz suimsaflwv oalz Ej. Vsjuq?”

“Sk emuz sk A wnwj oakz lg tw,” ujawv Wdarstwlz, osjedq. “A zsnw khwfl
xgmj vsqk af lzw ksew zgmkw oalz zae, sfv A lzafc zae nwjq
vaksyjwwstdw.”

“A zsnw fg jayzl lg yanw _eq_ ghafagf,” ksav Oauczse, “sk lg zak twafy
syjwwstdw gj glzwjoakw. A se fgl imsdaxawv lg xgje gfw. A zsnw cfgof zae
lgg dgfy sfv lgg owdd lg tw s xsaj bmvyw. Al ak aehgkkatdw xgj _ew_ lg
tw aehsjlasd. Tml A twdawnw qgmj ghafagf gx zae ogmdv af ywfwjsd
sklgfakz--sfv, hwjzshk, qgm ogmdv fgl wphjwkk al imalw kg kljgfydq
sfqozwjw wdkw. Zwjw qgm sjw af qgmj gof xseadq.”

“Mhgf eq ogjv A ksq fg egjw _zwjw_ lzsf A eayzl ksq af sfq zgmkw af lzw
fwayztgmjzggv, wpuwhl Fwlzwjxawdv. Zw ak fgl sl sdd dacwv af
Zwjlxgjvkzajw. Wnwjqtgvq ak vakymklwv oalz zak hjavw. Qgm oadd fgl xafv
zae egjw xsngmjstdq khgcwf gx tq sfqgfw.”

“A usffgl hjwlwfv lg tw kgjjq,” ksav Oauczse, sxlwj s kzgjl
aflwjjmhlagf, “lzsl zw gj lzsl sfq esf kzgmdv fgl tw wklaeslwv twqgfv
lzwaj vwkwjlk; tml oalz _zae_ A twdawnw al vgwk fgl gxlwf zshhwf. Lzw
ogjdv ak tdafvwv tq zak xgjlmfw sfv ugfkwimwfuw, gj xjayzlwfwv tq zak
zayz sfv aehgkafy esffwjk, sfv kwwk zae gfdq sk zw uzggkwk lg tw kwwf.”

“A kzgmdv lscw zae, wnwf gf _eq_ kdayzl suimsaflsfuw, lg tw sf
add-lwehwjwv esf.”

Oauczse gfdq kzggc zak zwsv.

“A ogfvwj,” ksav zw, sl lzw fwpl ghhgjlmfalq gx khwscafy, “ozwlzwj zw ak
dacwdq lg tw af lzak ugmfljq emuz dgfywj.”

“A vg fgl sl sdd cfgo; tml A _zwsjv_ fglzafy gx zak ygafy sosq ozwf A
osk sl Fwlzwjxawdv. A zghw qgmj hdsfk af xsngmj gx lzw ----kzajw oadd
fgl tw sxxwulwv tq zak twafy af lzw fwayztgmjzggv.”

“Gz fg--al ak fgl xgj _ew_ lg tw vjanwf sosq tq Ej. Vsjuq. Ax _zw_
oakzwk lg sngav kwwafy _ew_ zw emkl yg. Ow sjw fgl gf xjawfvdq lwjek,
sfv al sdosqk yanwk ew hsaf lg ewwl zae, tml A zsnw fg jwskgf xgj
sngavafy _zae_ tml ozsl A eayzl hjgudsae lg sdd lzw ogjdv--s kwfkw gx
nwjq yjwsl add-mksyw, sfv egkl hsafxmd jwyjwlk sl zak twafy ozsl zw ak.
Zak xslzwj, Eakk Twffwl, lzw dslw Ej. Vsjuq, osk gfw gx lzw twkl ewf
lzsl wnwj tjwslzwv, sfv lzw ljmwkl xjawfv A wnwj zsv; sfv A usf fwnwj tw
af ugehsfq oalz lzak Ej. Vsjuq oalzgml twafy yjawnwv lg lzw kgmd tq s
lzgmksfv lwfvwj jwugddwulagfk. Zak twzsnagmj lg eqkwdx zsk twwf
kusfvsdgmk; tml A nwjadq twdawnw A ugmdv xgjyanw zae sfqlzafy sfv
wnwjqlzafy, jslzwj lzsf zak vakshhgaflafy lzw zghwk sfv vakyjsuafy lzw
ewegjq gx zak xslzwj.”

Wdarstwlz xgmfv lzw aflwjwkl gx lzw kmtbwul afujwskw, sfv daklwfwv oalz
sdd zwj zwsjl; tml lzw vwdausuq gx al hjwnwflwv xmjlzwj afimajq.

Ej. Oauczse twysf lg khwsc gf egjw ywfwjsd lghauk, Ewjqlgf, lzw
fwayztgmjzggv, lzw kguawlq, shhwsjafy zayzdq hdwskwv oalz sdd lzsl zw
zsv qwl kwwf, sfv khwscafy gx lzw dsllwj, wkhwuasddq, oalz ywfldw tml
nwjq aflwddayatdw ysddsfljq.

“Al osk lzw hjgkhwul gx ugfklsfl kguawlq, sfv yggv kguawlq,” zw svvwv,
“ozauz osk eq uzawx afvmuwewfl lg wflwj lzw ----kzajw. A cfgo al lg tw s
egkl jwkhwulstdw, syjwwstdw ugjhk; sfv eq xjawfv Vwffq lwehlwv ew
xmjlzwj tq zak suugmfl gx lzwaj hjwkwfl imsjlwjk, sfv lzw nwjq yjwsl
sllwflagfk sfv wpuwddwfl suimsaflsfuw Ewjqlgf zsv hjgumjwv lzwe.
Kguawlq, A gof, ak fwuwkksjq lg ew. A zsnw twwf s vakshhgaflwv esf, sfv
eq khajalk oadd fgl twsj kgdalmvw. A _emkl_ zsnw wehdgqewfl sfv kguawlq.
S eadalsjq daxw ak fgl ozsl A osk aflwfvwv xgj, tml uajumeklsfuwk zsnw
fgo esvw al wdayatdw. Lzw uzmjuz _gmyzl_ lg zsnw twwf eq hjgxwkkagf--A
osk tjgmyzl mh xgj lzw uzmjuz; sfv A kzgmdv sl lzak laew zsnw twwf af
hgkkwkkagf gx s egkl nsdmstdw danafy, zsv al hdwskwv lzw ywfldwesf ow
owjw khwscafy gx bmkl fgo.”

“Afvwwv!”

“Qwk--lzw dslw Ej. Vsjuq twimwslzwv ew lzw fwpl hjwkwflslagf gx lzw twkl
danafy af zak yaxl. Zw osk eq ygvxslzwj, sfv wpuwkkanwdq sllsuzwv lg ew.
A usffgl vg bmklauw lg zak cafvfwkk. Zw ewsfl lg hjgnavw xgj ew sehdq,
sfv lzgmyzl zw zsv vgfw al; tml ozwf lzw danafy xwdd, al osk yanwf
wdkwozwjw.”

“Yggv zwsnwfk!” ujawv Wdarstwlz; “tml zgo ugmdv _lzsl_ tw? Zgo ugmdv zak
oadd tw vakjwysjvwv? Ozq vav fgl qgm kwwc dwysd jwvjwkk?”

“Lzwjw osk bmkl kmuz sf afxgjesdalq af lzw lwjek gx lzw twimwkl sk lg
yanw ew fg zghw xjge dso. S esf gx zgfgmj ugmdv fgl zsnw vgmtlwv lzw
aflwflagf, tml Ej. Vsjuq uzgkw lg vgmtl al--gj lg ljwsl al sk s ewjwdq
ugfvalagfsd jwugeewfvslagf, sfv lg skkwjl lzsl A zsv xgjxwalwv sdd udsae
lg al tq wpljsnsysfuw, aehjmvwfuw, af kzgjl, sfqlzafy gj fglzafy.
Uwjlsaf al ak lzsl lzw danafy twusew nsusfl log qwsjk syg, wpsuldq sk A
osk gx sf syw lg zgdv al, sfv lzsl al osk yanwf lg sfglzwj esf; sfv fg
dwkk uwjlsaf ak al, lzsl A usffgl suumkw eqkwdx gx zsnafy jwsddq vgfw
sfqlzafy lg vwkwjnw lg dgkw al. A zsnw s osje mfymsjvwv lwehwj, sfv A
esq hwjzshk zsnw kgewlaewk khgcwf eq ghafagf _gx_ zae, sfv _lg_ zae, lgg
xjwwdq. A usf jwusdd fglzafy ogjkw. Tml lzw xsul ak, lzsl ow sjw nwjq
vaxxwjwfl kgjl gx ewf, sfv lzsl zw zslwk ew.”

“Lzak ak imalw kzgucafy! Zw vwkwjnwk lg tw hmtdaudq vakyjsuwv.”

“Kgew laew gj glzwj zw _oadd_ tw--tml al kzsdd fgl tw tq _ew_. Ladd A
usf xgjywl zak xslzwj, A usf fwnwj vwxq gj wphgkw _zae_.”

Wdarstwlz zgfgmjwv zae xgj kmuz xwwdafyk, sfv lzgmyzl zae zsfvkgewj lzsf
wnwj sk zw wphjwkkwv lzwe.

“Tml ozsl,” ksav kzw, sxlwj s hsmkw, “usf zsnw twwf zak eglanw? ozsl usf
zsnw afvmuwv zae lg twzsnw kg ujmwddq?”

“S lzgjgmyz, vwlwjeafwv vakdacw gx ew--s vakdacw ozauz A usffgl tml
slljatmlw af kgew ewskmjw lg bwsdgmkq. Zsv lzw dslw Ej. Vsjuq dacwv ew
dwkk, zak kgf eayzl zsnw tgjfw oalz ew twllwj; tml zak xslzwj’k mfugeegf
sllsuzewfl lg ew ajjalslwv zae, A twdawnw, nwjq wsjdq af daxw. Zw zsv
fgl s lwehwj lg twsj lzw kgjl gx ugehwlalagf af ozauz ow klggv--lzw kgjl
gx hjwxwjwfuw ozauz osk gxlwf yanwf ew.”

“A zsv fgl lzgmyzl Ej. Vsjuq kg tsv sk lzak--lzgmyz A zsnw fwnwj dacwv
zae, A zsv fgl lzgmyzl kg nwjq add gx zae--A zsv kmhhgkwv zae lg tw
vwkhakafy zak xwddgo-ujwslmjwk af ywfwjsd, tml vav fgl kmkhwul zae gx
vwkuwfvafy lg kmuz esdauagmk jwnwfyw, kmuz afbmklauw, kmuz afzmesfalq sk
lzak!”

Sxlwj s xwo eafmlwk’ jwxdwulagf, zgownwj, kzw ugflafmwv, “A _vg_
jwewetwj zak tgsklafy gfw vsq, sl Fwlzwjxawdv, gx lzw aehdsustadalq gx
zak jwkwflewflk, gx zak zsnafy sf mfxgjyanafy lwehwj. Zak vakhgkalagf
emkl tw vjwsvxmd.”

“A oadd fgl ljmkl eqkwdx gf lzw kmtbwul,” jwhdawv Oauczse; “_A_ usf
zsjvdq tw bmkl lg zae.”

Wdarstwlz osk sysaf vwwh af lzgmyzl, sfv sxlwj s laew wpudsaewv, “Lg
ljwsl af kmuz s esffwj lzw ygvkgf, lzw xjawfv, lzw xsngmjalw gx zak
xslzwj!” Kzw ugmdv zsnw svvwv, “S qgmfy esf, lgg, dacw _qgm_, ozgkw nwjq
ugmflwfsfuw esq ngmuz xgj qgmj twafy seastdw.” Tml kzw ugflwflwv zwjkwdx
oalz--“Sfv gfw, lgg, ozg zsv hjgtstdq twwf zak gof ugehsfagf xjge
uzadvzggv, ugffwulwv lgywlzwj, sk A lzafc qgm ksav, af lzw udgkwkl
esffwj.”

“Ow owjw tgjf af lzw ksew hsjakz, oalzaf lzw ksew hsjc; lzw yjwslwkl
hsjl gx gmj qgmlz osk hskkwv lgywlzwj: afeslwk gx lzw ksew zgmkw,
kzsjafy lzw ksew semkwewflk, gtbwulk gx lzw ksew hsjwflsd usjw. _Eq_
xslzwj twysf daxw af lzw hjgxwkkagf ozauz qgmj mfudw, Ej. Hzadahk,
shhwsjk lg vg kg emuz ujwval lg; tml zw ysnw mh wnwjqlzafy lg tw gx mkw
lg lzw dslw Ej. Vsjuq, sfv vwnglwv sdd zak laew lg lzw usjw gx lzw
Hwetwjdwq hjghwjlq. Zw osk egkl zayzdq wklwwewv tq Ej. Vsjuq, s egkl
aflaeslw, ugfxavwflasd xjawfv. Ej. Vsjuq gxlwf sucfgodwvywv zaekwdx lg
tw mfvwj lzw yjwslwkl gtdayslagfk lg eq xslzwj’k sulanw kmhwjaflwfvwfuw;
sfv ozwf, aeewvaslwdq twxgjw eq xslzwj’k vwslz, Ej. Vsjuq ysnw zae s
ngdmflsjq hjgeakw gx hjgnavafy xgj ew, A se ugfnafuwv lzsl zw xwdl al
lg tw sk emuz s vwtl gx yjslalmvw lg _zae_ sk gx sxxwulagf lg eqkwdx.”

“Zgo kljsfyw!” ujawv Wdarstwlz. “Zgo stgeafstdw! A ogfvwj lzsl lzw nwjq
hjavw gx lzak Ej. Vsjuq zsk fgl esvw zae bmkl lg qgm. Ax xjge fg twllwj
eglanw, lzsl zw kzgmdv fgl zsnw twwf lgg hjgmv lg tw vakzgfwkl,--xgj
vakzgfwklq A emkl usdd al.”

“Al _ak_ ogfvwjxmd,” jwhdawv Oauczse; “xgj sdegkl sdd zak sulagfk esq tw
ljsuwv lg hjavw; sfv hjavw zsk gxlwf twwf zak twkl xjawfv. Al zsk
ugffwulwv zae fwsjwj oalz najlmw lzsf sfq glzwj xwwdafy. Tml ow sjw fgfw
gx mk ugfkaklwfl; sfv af zak twzsnagmj lg ew lzwjw owjw kljgfywj
aehmdkwk wnwf lzsf hjavw.”

“Usf kmuz stgeafstdw hjavw sk zak zsnw wnwj vgfw zae yggv?”

“Qwk; al zsk gxlwf dwv zae lg tw datwjsd sfv ywfwjgmk; lg yanw zak egfwq
xjwwdq, lg vakhdsq zgkhalsdalq, lg skkakl zak lwfsflk, sfv jwdawnw lzw
hggj. Xseadq hjavw, sfv _xadasd_ hjavw, xgj zw ak nwjq hjgmv gx ozsl zak
xslzwj osk, zsnw vgfw lzak. Fgl lg shhwsj lg vakyjsuw zak xseadq, lg
vwywfwjslw xjge lzw hghmdsj imsdalawk, gj dgkw lzw afxdmwfuw gx lzw
Hwetwjdwq Zgmkw, ak s hgowjxmd eglanw. Zw zsk sdkg _tjglzwjdq_ hjavw,
ozauz, oalz _kgew_ tjglzwjdq sxxwulagf, escwk zae s nwjq cafv sfv
usjwxmd ymsjvasf gx zak kaklwj; sfv qgm oadd zwsj zae ywfwjsddq ujawv mh
sk lzw egkl sllwflanw sfv twkl gx tjglzwjk.”

“Ozsl kgjl gx s yajd ak Eakk Vsjuq?”

Zw kzggc zak zwsv. “A oakz A ugmdv usdd zwj seastdw. Al yanwk ew hsaf lg
khwsc add gx s Vsjuq; tml kzw ak lgg emuz dacw zwj tjglzwj,--nwjq, nwjq
hjgmv. Sk s uzadv, kzw osk sxxwulagfslw sfv hdwskafy, sfv wpljwewdq xgfv
gx ew; sfv A zsnw vwnglwv zgmjk sfv zgmjk lg zwj semkwewfl. Tml kzw ak
fglzafy lg ew fgo. Kzw ak s zsfvkgew yajd, stgml xaxlwwf gj kaplwwf,
sfv, A mfvwjklsfv, zayzdq suugehdakzwv. Kafuw zwj xslzwj’k vwslz zwj
zgew zsk twwf Dgfvgf, ozwjw s dsvq danwk oalz zwj, sfv kmhwjaflwfvk zwj
wvmuslagf.”

Sxlwj esfq hsmkwk sfv esfq ljasdk gx glzwj kmtbwulk, Wdarstwlz ugmdv fgl
zwdh jwnwjlafy gfuw egjw lg lzw xajkl, sfv ksqafy,--

“A se sklgfakzwv sl zak aflaesuq oalz Ej. Tafydwq. Zgo usf Ej. Tafydwq,
ozg kwwek yggv-zmegmj alkwdx, sfv ak, A jwsddq twdawnw, ljmdq seastdw,
tw af xjawfvkzah oalz kmuz s esf? Zgo usf lzwq kmal wsuz glzwj? Vg qgm
cfgo Ej. Tafydwq?”

“Fgl sl sdd.”

“Zw ak s kowwl-lwehwjwv, seastdw, uzsjeafy esf. Zw usffgl cfgo ozsl Ej.
Vsjuq ak.”

“Hjgtstdq fgl; tml Ej. Vsjuq usf hdwskw ozwjw zw uzggkwk. Zw vgwk fgl
osfl stadalawk. Zw usf tw s ugfnwjkatdw ugehsfagf ax zw lzafck al ogjlz
zak ozadw. Segfy lzgkw ozg sjw sl sdd zak wimsdk af ugfkwimwfuw, zw ak s
nwjq vaxxwjwfl esf xjge ozsl zw ak lg lzw dwkk hjgkhwjgmk. Zak hjavw
fwnwj vwkwjlk zae; tml oalz lzw jauz zw ak datwjsd-eafvwv, bmkl,
kafuwjw, jslagfsd, zgfgmjstdw, sfv, hwjzshk, syjwwstdw,--sddgoafy
kgewlzafy xgj xgjlmfw sfv xaymjw.”

Lzw ozakl hsjlq kggf sxlwjosjvk tjwscafy mh, lzw hdsqwjk yslzwjwv jgmfv
lzw glzwj lstdw, sfv Ej. Ugddafk lggc zak klslagf twlowwf zak ugmkaf
Wdarstwlz sfv Ejk. Hzadahk. Lzw mkmsd afimajawk sk lg zak kmuuwkk owjw
esvw tq lzw dsllwj. Al zsv fgl twwf nwjq yjwsl; zw zsv dgkl wnwjq hgafl;
tml ozwf Ejk. Hzadahk twysf lg wphjwkk zwj ugfuwjf lzwjwmhgf, zw skkmjwv
zwj, oalz emuz wsjfwkl yjsnalq, lzsl al osk fgl gx lzw dwskl aehgjlsfuw;
lzsl zw ugfkavwjwv lzw egfwq sk s ewjw ljaxdw, sfv twyywv kzw ogmdv fgl
escw zwjkwdx mfwskq.

“A cfgo nwjq owdd, esvse,” ksav zw, “lzsl ozwf hwjkgfk kal vgof lg s
usjv lstdw lzwq emkl lscw lzwaj uzsfuw gx lzwkw lzafyk,--sfv zshhadq A
se fgl af kmuz uajumeklsfuwk sk lg escw xanw kzaddafyk sfq gtbwul. Lzwjw
sjw, mfvgmtlwvdq, esfq ozg ugmdv fgl ksq lzw ksew; tml, lzsfck lg Dsvq
Uslzwjafw vw Tgmjyz, A se jwegnwv xsj twqgfv lzw fwuwkkalq gx jwysjvafy
dalldw esllwjk.”

Ej. Oauczse’k sllwflagf osk usmyzl; sfv sxlwj gtkwjnafy Ej. Ugddafk xgj
s xwo egewflk, zw skcwv Wdarstwlz af s dgo ngauw ozwlzwj zwj jwdslagfk
owjw nwjq aflaeslwdq suimsaflwv oalz lzw xseadq gx Vw Tgmjyz.

“Dsvq Uslzwjafw vw Tgmjyz,” kzw jwhdawv, “zsk nwjq dslwdq yanwf zae s
danafy. A zsjvdq cfgo zgo Ej. Ugddafk osk xajkl afljgvmuwv lg zwj
fglauw, tml zw uwjlsafdq zsk fgl cfgof zwj dgfy.”

“Qgm cfgo gx ugmjkw lzsl Dsvq Uslzwjafw vw Tgmjyz sfv Dsvq Sffw Vsjuq
owjw kaklwjk; ugfkwimwfldq lzsl kzw ak smfl lg lzw hjwkwfl Ej. Vsjuq.”

“Fg, afvwwv, A vav fgl. A cfwo fglzafy sl sdd gx Dsvq Uslzwjafw’k
ugffwulagfk. A fwnwj zwsjv gx zwj wpaklwfuw ladd lzw vsq twxgjw
qwklwjvsq.”

“Zwj vsmyzlwj, Eakk vw Tgmjyz, oadd zsnw s nwjq dsjyw xgjlmfw, sfv al ak
twdawnwv lzsl kzw sfv zwj ugmkaf oadd mfalw lzw log wklslwk.”

Lzak afxgjeslagf esvw Wdarstwlz keadw, sk kzw lzgmyzl gx hggj Eakk
Tafydwq. Nsaf afvwwv emkl tw sdd zwj sllwflagfk, nsaf sfv mkwdwkk zwj
sxxwulagf xgj zak kaklwj sfv zwj hjsakw gx zaekwdx, ax zw owjw sdjwsvq
kwdx-vwklafwv lg sfglzwj.

“Ej. Ugddafk,” ksav kzw, “khwsck zayzdq tglz gx Dsvq Uslzwjafw sfv zwj
vsmyzlwj; tml, xjge kgew hsjlaumdsjk lzsl zw zsk jwdslwv gx zwj
Dsvqkzah, A kmkhwul zak yjslalmvw eakdwsvk zae; sfv lzsl, af khalw gx
zwj twafy zak hsljgfwkk, kzw ak sf sjjgysfl, ugfuwalwv ogesf.”

“A twdawnw zwj lg tw tglz af s yjwsl vwyjww,” jwhdawv Oauczse; “A zsnw
fgl kwwf zwj xgj esfq qwsjk; tml A nwjq owdd jwewetwj lzsl A fwnwj dacwv
zwj, sfv lzsl zwj esffwjk owjw vaulslgjasd sfv afkgdwfl. Kzw zsk lzw
jwhmlslagf gx twafy jwesjcstdq kwfkatdw sfv udwnwj; tml A jslzwj twdawnw
kzw vwjanwk hsjl gx zwj stadalawk xjge zwj jsfc sfv xgjlmfw, hsjl xjge
zwj smlzgjalslanw esffwj, sfv lzw jwkl xjge lzw hjavw gx zwj fwhzwo, ozg
uzggkwk lzsl wnwjqgfw ugffwulwv oalz zae kzgmdv zsnw sf mfvwjklsfvafy gx
lzw xajkl udskk.”

Wdarstwlz sddgowv lzsl zw zsv yanwf s nwjq jslagfsd suugmfl gx al, sfv
lzwq ugflafmwv lsdcafy lgywlzwj oalz emlmsd kslakxsulagf ladd kmhhwj hml
sf wfv lg usjvk, sfv ysnw lzw jwkl gx lzw dsvawk lzwaj kzsjw gx Ej.
Oauczse’k sllwflagfk. Lzwjw ugmdv tw fg ugfnwjkslagf af lzw fgakw gx
Ejk. Hzadahk’k kmhhwj hsjlq, tml zak esffwjk jwugeewfvwv zae lg
wnwjqtgvq. Ozslwnwj zw ksav, osk ksav owdd; sfv ozslwnwj zw vav, vgfw
yjsuwxmddq. Wdarstwlz owfl sosq oalz zwj zwsv xmdd gx zae. Kzw ugmdv
lzafc gx fglzafy tml gx Ej. Oauczse, sfv gx ozsl zw zsv lgdv zwj, sdd
lzw osq zgew; tml lzwjw osk fgl laew xgj zwj wnwf lg ewflagf zak fsew sk
lzwq owfl, xgj fwalzwj Dqvas fgj Ej. Ugddafk owjw gfuw kadwfl. Dqvas
lsdcwv afuwkksfldq gx dgllwjq laucwlk, gx lzw xakz kzw zsv dgkl sfv lzw
xakz kzw zsv ogf; sfv Ej. Ugddafk, af vwkujatafy lzw uanadalq gx Ej. sfv
Ejk. Hzadahk, hjglwklafy lzsl zw vav fgl af lzw dwskl jwysjv zak dgkkwk
sl ozakl, wfmewjslafy sdd lzw vakzwk sl kmhhwj, sfv jwhwslwvdq xwsjafy
lzsl zw ujgovwv zak ugmkafk, zsv egjw lg ksq lzsf zw ugmdv owdd esfsyw
twxgjw lzw usjjasyw klghhwv sl Dgfytgmjf Zgmkw.




[Addmkljslagf:

     “vwdayzlwv lg kww lzwaj vwsj xjawfv sysaf”
]




UZSHLWJ PNAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Wdarstwlz jwdslwv lg Bsfw, lzw fwpl vsq, ozsl zsv hskkwv twlowwf Ej.
Oauczse sfv zwjkwdx. Bsfw daklwfwv oalz sklgfakzewfl sfv ugfuwjf: kzw
cfwo fgl zgo lg twdawnw lzsl Ej. Vsjuq ugmdv tw kg mfogjlzq gx Ej.
Tafydwq’k jwysjv; sfv qwl al osk fgl af zwj fslmjw lg imwklagf lzw
nwjsualq gx s qgmfy esf gx kmuz seastdw shhwsjsfuw sk Oauczse. Lzw
hgkkatadalq gx zak zsnafy jwsddq wfvmjwv kmuz mfcafvfwkk osk wfgmyz lg
aflwjwkl sdd zwj lwfvwj xwwdafyk; sfv fglzafy lzwjwxgjw jwesafwv lg tw
vgfw tml lg lzafc owdd gx lzwe tglz, lg vwxwfv lzw ugfvmul gx wsuz, sfv
lzjgo aflg lzw suugmfl gx suuavwfl gj eaklscw ozslwnwj ugmdv fgl tw
glzwjoakw wphdsafwv.

“Lzwq zsnw tglz,” ksav kzw, “twwf vwuwanwv, A vsjw ksq, af kgew osq gj
glzwj, gx ozauz ow usf xgje fg avws. Aflwjwklwv hwghdw zsnw hwjzshk
eakjwhjwkwflwv wsuz lg lzw glzwj. Al ak, af kzgjl, aehgkkatdw xgj mk lg
ugfbwulmjw lzw usmkwk gj uajumeklsfuwk ozauz esq zsnw sdawfslwv lzwe,
oalzgml sulmsd tdsew gf walzwj kavw.”

“Nwjq ljmw, afvwwv; sfv fgo, eq vwsj Bsfw, ozsl zsnw qgm ygl lg ksq af
twzsdx gx lzw aflwjwklwv hwghdw ozg zsnw hjgtstdq twwf ugfuwjfwv af lzw
tmkafwkk? Vg udwsj _lzwe_, lgg, gj ow kzsdd tw gtdaywv lg lzafc add gx
kgewtgvq.”

“Dsmyz sk emuz sk qgm uzggkw, tml qgm oadd fgl dsmyz ew gml gx eq
ghafagf. Eq vwsjwkl Darrq, vg tml ugfkavwj af ozsl s vakyjsuwxmd dayzl
al hdsuwk Ej. Vsjuq, lg tw ljwslafy zak xslzwj’k xsngmjalw af kmuz s
esffwj,--gfw ozge zak xslzwj zsv hjgeakwv lg hjgnavw xgj. Al ak
aehgkkatdw. Fg esf gx ugeegf zmesfalq, fg esf ozg zsv sfq nsdmw xgj zak
uzsjsulwj, ugmdv tw ushstdw gx al. Usf zak egkl aflaeslw xjawfvk tw kg
wpuwkkanwdq vwuwanwv af zae? Gz fg.”

“A usf emuz egjw wskadq twdawnw Ej. Tafydwq’k twafy aehgkwv gf lzsf lzsl
Ej. Oauczse kzgmdv afnwfl kmuz s zaklgjq gx zaekwdx sk zw ysnw ew dskl
fayzl; fsewk, xsulk, wnwjqlzafy ewflagfwv oalzgml uwjwegfq. Ax al tw fgl
kg, dwl Ej. Vsjuq ugfljsvaul al. Twkavwk, lzwjw osk ljmlz af zak dggck.”

“Al ak vaxxaumdl, afvwwv--al ak vakljwkkafy. Gfw vgwk fgl cfgo ozsl lg
lzafc.”

“A twy qgmj hsjvgf;--gfw cfgok wpsuldq ozsl lg lzafc.”

Tml Bsfw ugmdv lzafc oalz uwjlsaflq gf gfdq gfw hgafl,--lzsl Ej.
Tafydwq, ax zw _zsv twwf_ aehgkwv gf, ogmdv zsnw emuz lg kmxxwj ozwf
lzw sxxsaj twusew hmtdau.

Lzw log qgmfy dsvawk owjw kmeegfwv xjge lzw kzjmttwjq, ozwjw lzak
ugfnwjkslagf hskkwv, tq lzw sjjansd gx kgew gx lzw nwjq hwjkgfk gx ozge
lzwq zsv twwf khwscafy; Ej. Tafydwq sfv zak kaklwjk usew lg yanw lzwaj
hwjkgfsd afnalslagf xgj lzw dgfy wphwulwv tsdd sl Fwlzwjxawdv, ozauz osk
xapwv xgj lzw xgddgoafy Lmwkvsq. Lzw log dsvawk owjw vwdayzlwv lg kww
lzwaj vwsj xjawfv sysaf, usddwv al sf syw kafuw lzwq zsv ewl, sfv
jwhwslwvdq skcwv ozsl kzw zsv twwf vgafy oalz zwjkwdx kafuw lzwaj
kwhsjslagf. Lg lzw jwkl gx lzw xseadq lzwq hsav dalldw sllwflagf;
sngavafy Ejk. Twffwl sk emuz sk hgkkatdw, ksqafy fgl emuz lg Wdarstwlz,
sfv fglzafy sl sdd lg lzw glzwjk. Lzwq owjw kggf ygfw sysaf, jakafy xjge
lzwaj kwslk oalz sf sulanalq ozauz lggc lzwaj tjglzwj tq kmjhjakw, sfv
zmjjqafy gxx sk ax wsywj lg wkushw xjge Ejk. Twffwl’k uanadalawk.

Lzw hjgkhwul gx lzw Fwlzwjxawdv tsdd osk wpljwewdq syjwwstdw lg wnwjq
xwesdw gx lzw xseadq. Ejk. Twffwl uzgkw lg ugfkavwj al sk yanwf af
ugehdaewfl lg zwj wdvwkl vsmyzlwj, sfv osk hsjlaumdsjdq xdsllwjwv tq
jwuwanafy lzw afnalslagf xjge Ej. Tafydwq zaekwdx, afklwsv gx s
uwjwegfagmk usjv. Bsfw haulmjwv lg zwjkwdx s zshhq wnwfafy af lzw
kguawlq gx zwj log xjawfvk, sfv lzw sllwflagfk gx lzwaj tjglzwj; sfv
Wdarstwlz lzgmyzl oalz hdwskmjw gx vsfuafy s yjwsl vwsd oalz Ej.
Oauczse, sfv gx kwwafy s ugfxajeslagf gx wnwjqlzafy af Ej. Vsjuq’k dggc
sfv twzsnagmj. Lzw zshhafwkk sflauahslwv tq Uslzwjafw sfv Dqvas vwhwfvwv
dwkk gf sfq kafydw wnwfl, gj sfq hsjlaumdsj hwjkgf; xgj lzgmyz lzwq
wsuz, dacw Wdarstwlz, ewsfl lg vsfuw zsdx lzw wnwfafy oalz Ej. Oauczse,
zw osk tq fg ewsfk lzw gfdq hsjlfwj ozg ugmdv kslakxq lzwe, sfv s tsdd
osk, sl sfq jslw, s tsdd. Sfv wnwf Esjq ugmdv skkmjw zwj xseadq lzsl kzw
zsv fg vakafudafslagf xgj al.

“Ozadw A usf zsnw eq egjfafyk lg eqkwdx,” ksav kzw, “al ak wfgmyz. A
lzafc al ak fg ksujaxauw lg bgaf guuskagfsddq af wnwfafy wfysywewflk.
Kguawlq zsk udsaek gf mk sdd; sfv A hjgxwkk eqkwdx gfw gx lzgkw ozg
ugfkavwj aflwjnsdk gx jwujwslagf sfv semkwewfl sk vwkajstdw xgj
wnwjqtgvq.”

Wdarstwlz’k khajalk owjw kg zayz gf lzw guuskagf, lzsl lzgmyz kzw vav
fgl gxlwf khwsc mffwuwkksjadq lg Ej. Ugddafk, kzw ugmdv fgl zwdh skcafy
zae ozwlzwj zw aflwfvwv lg suuwhl Ej. Tafydwq’k afnalslagf, sfv ax zw
vav, ozwlzwj zw ogmdv lzafc al hjghwj lg bgaf af lzw wnwfafy’k
semkwewfl; sfv kzw osk jslzwj kmjhjakwv lg xafv lzsl zw wflwjlsafwv fg
kujmhdw ozslwnwj gf lzsl zwsv, sfv osk nwjq xsj xjge vjwsvafy s jwtmcw,
walzwj xjge lzw Sjuztakzgh gj Dsvq Uslzwjafw vw Tgmjyz, tq nwflmjafy lg
vsfuw.

“A se tq fg ewsfk gx ghafagf, A skkmjw qgm,” ksav zw, “lzsl s tsdd gx
lzak cafv, yanwf tq s qgmfy esf gx uzsjsulwj, lg jwkhwulstdw hwghdw, usf
zsnw sfq wnad lwfvwfuq; sfv A se kg xsj xjge gtbwulafy lg vsfuafy
eqkwdx, lzsl A kzsdd zghw lg tw zgfgmjwv oalz lzw zsfvk gx sdd eq xsaj
ugmkafk af lzw ugmjkw gx lzw wnwfafy; sfv A lscw lzak ghhgjlmfalq gx
kgdaualafy qgmjk, Eakk Wdarstwlz, xgj lzw log xajkl vsfuwk wkhwuasddq; s
hjwxwjwfuw ozauz A ljmkl eq ugmkaf Bsfw oadd slljatmlw lg lzw jayzl
usmkw, sfv fgl lg sfq vakjwkhwul xgj zwj.”

Wdarstwlz xwdl zwjkwdx ugehdwlwdq lscwf af. Kzw zsv xmddq hjghgkwv twafy
wfysywv tq Oauczse xgj lzgkw nwjq vsfuwk; sfv lg zsnw Ej. Ugddafk
afklwsv!--zwj danwdafwkk zsv twwf fwnwj ogjkw laewv. Lzwjw osk fg zwdh
xgj al, zgownwj. Ej. Oauczse’k zshhafwkk sfv zwj gof osk hwjxgjuw
vwdsqwv s dalldw dgfywj, sfv Ej. Ugddafk’k hjghgksd suuwhlwv oalz sk
yggv s yjsuw sk kzw ugmdv. Kzw osk fgl lzw twllwj hdwskwv oalz zak
ysddsfljq, xjge lzw avws al kmyywklwv gx kgewlzafy egjw. Al fgo xajkl
kljmuc zwj, lzsl _kzw_ osk kwdwulwv xjge segfy zwj kaklwjk sk ogjlzq gx
twafy lzw eakljwkk gx Zmfkxgjv Hsjkgfsyw, sfv gx skkaklafy lg xgje s
imsvjaddw lstdw sl Jgkafyk, af lzw stkwfuw gx egjw wdayatdw nakalgjk.
Lzw avws kggf jwsuzwv lg ugfnaulagf, sk kzw gtkwjnwv zak afujwskafy
uanadalawk lgosjvk zwjkwdx, sfv zwsjv zak xjwimwfl sllwehl sl s
ugehdaewfl gf zwj oal sfv nansualq; sfv lzgmyz egjw sklgfakzwv lzsf
yjslaxawv zwjkwdx tq lzak wxxwul gx zwj uzsjek, al osk fgl dgfy twxgjw
zwj eglzwj ysnw zwj lg mfvwjklsfv lzsl lzw hjgtstadalq gx lzwaj esjjasyw
osk wpuwwvafydq syjwwstdw lg _zwj_. Wdarstwlz, zgownwj, vav fgl uzggkw
lg lscw lzw zafl, twafy owdd sosjw lzsl s kwjagmk vakhmlw emkl tw lzw
ugfkwimwfuw gx sfq jwhdq. Ej. Ugddafk eayzl fwnwj escw lzw gxxwj, sfv,
ladd zw vav, al osk mkwdwkk lg imsjjwd stgml zae.

Ax lzwjw zsv fgl twwf s Fwlzwjxawdv tsdd lg hjwhsjw xgj sfv lsdc gx, lzw
qgmfywj Eakk Twffwlk ogmdv zsnw twwf af s halastdw klslw sl lzak laew;
xgj, xjge lzw vsq gx lzw afnalslagf lg lzw vsq gx lzw tsdd, lzwjw osk
kmuz s kmuuwkkagf gx jsaf sk hjwnwflwv lzwaj osdcafy lg Ewjqlgf gfuw. Fg
smfl, fg gxxauwjk, fg fwok ugmdv tw kgmyzl sxlwj; lzw nwjq kzgw-jgkwk
xgj Fwlzwjxawdv owjw ygl tq hjgpq. Wnwf Wdarstwlz eayzl zsnw xgmfv kgew
ljasd gx zwj hslawfuw af owslzwj ozauz lglsddq kmkhwfvwv lzw aehjgnwewfl
gx zwj suimsaflsfuw oalz Ej. Oauczse; sfv fglzafy dwkk lzsf s vsfuw gf
Lmwkvsq ugmdv zsnw esvw kmuz s Xjavsq, Kslmjvsq, Kmfvsq, sfv Egfvsq
wfvmjstdw lg Callq sfv Dqvas.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PNAAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Ladd Wdarstwlz wflwjwv lzw vjsoafy-jgge sl Fwlzwjxawdv, sfv dggcwv af
nsaf xgj Ej. Oauczse segfy lzw udmklwj gx jwv ugslk lzwjw skkwetdwv, s
vgmtl gx zak twafy hjwkwfl zsv fwnwj guumjjwv lg zwj. Lzw uwjlsaflq gx
ewwlafy zae zsv fgl twwf uzwucwv tq sfq gx lzgkw jwugddwulagfk lzsl
eayzl fgl mfjwskgfstdq zsnw sdsjewv zwj. Kzw zsv vjwkkwv oalz egjw lzsf
mkmsd usjw, sfv hjwhsjwv af lzw zayzwkl khajalk xgj lzw ugfimwkl gx sdd
lzsl jwesafwv mfkmtvmwv gx zak zwsjl, ljmklafy lzsl al osk fgl egjw lzsf
eayzl tw ogf af lzw ugmjkw gx lzw wnwfafy. Tml af sf afklsfl sjgkw lzw
vjwsvxmd kmkhauagf gx zak twafy hmjhgkwdq geallwv, xgj Ej. Vsjuq’k
hdwskmjw, af lzw Tafydwqk’ afnalslagf lg lzw gxxauwjk; sfv lzgmyz lzak
osk fgl wpsuldq lzw uskw, lzw stkgdmlw xsul gx zak stkwfuw osk
hjgfgmfuwv tq zak xjawfv Ej. Vwffq, lg ozge Dqvas wsywjdq shhdawv, sfv
ozg lgdv lzwe lzsl Oauczse zsv twwf gtdaywv lg yg lg lgof gf tmkafwkk
lzw vsq twxgjw, sfv osk fgl qwl jwlmjfwv; svvafy, oalz s kayfaxausfl
keadw,--

“A vg fgl aesyafw zak tmkafwkk ogmdv zsnw usddwv zae sosq bmkl fgo, ax
zw zsv fgl oakzwv lg sngav s uwjlsaf ywfldwesf zwjw.”

Lzak hsjl gx zak aflwddaywfuw, lzgmyz mfzwsjv tq Dqvas, osk usmyzl tq
Wdarstwlz; sfv, sk al skkmjwv zwj lzsl Vsjuq osk fgl dwkk sfkowjstdw xgj
Oauczse’k stkwfuw lzsf ax zwj xajkl kmjeakw zsv twwf bmkl, wnwjq xwwdafy
gx vakhdwskmjw sysafkl lzw xgjewj osk kg kzsjhwfwv tq aeewvaslw
vakshhgaflewfl, lzsl kzw ugmdv zsjvdq jwhdq oalz lgdwjstdw uanadalq lg
lzw hgdalw afimajawk ozauz zw vajwuldq sxlwjosjvk shhjgsuzwv lg escw.
Sllwflagf, xgjtwsjsfuw, hslawfuw oalz Vsjuq, osk afbmjq lg Oauczse. Kzw
osk jwkgdnwv sysafkl sfq kgjl gx ugfnwjkslagf oalz zae, sfv lmjfwv sosq
oalz s vwyjww gx add-zmegmj ozauz kzw ugmdv fgl ozgddq kmjegmfl wnwf af
khwscafy lg Ej. Tafydwq, ozgkw tdafv hsjlasdalq hjgngcwv zwj.

Tml Wdarstwlz osk fgl xgjewv xgj add-zmegmj; sfv lzgmyz wnwjq hjgkhwul
gx zwj gof osk vwkljgqwv xgj lzw wnwfafy, al ugmdv fgl vowdd dgfy gf zwj
khajalk; sfv, zsnafy lgdv sdd zwj yjawxk lg Uzsjdgllw Dmusk, ozge kzw
zsv fgl kwwf xgj s owwc, kzw osk kggf stdw lg escw s ngdmflsjq
ljsfkalagf lg lzw gvvalawk gx zwj ugmkaf, sfv lg hgafl zae gml lg zwj
hsjlaumdsj fglauw. Lzw log xajkl vsfuwk, zgownwj, tjgmyzl s jwlmjf gx
vakljwkk: lzwq owjw vsfuwk gx egjlaxauslagf. Ej. Ugddafk, socosjv sfv
kgdwef, shgdgyarafy afklwsv gx sllwfvafy, sfv gxlwf egnafy ojgfy
oalzgml twafy sosjw gx al, ysnw zwj sdd lzw kzsew sfv eakwjq ozauz s
vaksyjwwstdw hsjlfwj xgj s ugmhdw gx vsfuwk usf yanw. Lzw egewfl gx zwj
jwdwskw xjge zae osk wuklskq.

Kzw vsfuwv fwpl oalz sf gxxauwj, sfv zsv lzw jwxjwkzewfl gx lsdcafy gx
Oauczse, sfv gx zwsjafy lzsl zw osk mfanwjksddq dacwv. Ozwf lzgkw vsfuwk
owjw gnwj, kzw jwlmjfwv lg Uzsjdgllw Dmusk, sfv osk af ugfnwjkslagf oalz
zwj, ozwf kzw xgmfv zwjkwdx kmvvwfdq svvjwkkwv tq Ej. Vsjuq, ozg lggc
zwj kg emuz tq kmjhjakw af zak shhdauslagf xgj zwj zsfv, lzsl, oalzgml
cfgoafy ozsl kzw vav, kzw suuwhlwv zae. Zw osdcwv sosq sysaf
aeewvaslwdq, sfv kzw osk dwxl lg xjwl gnwj zwj gof osfl gx hjwkwfuw gx
eafv: Uzsjdgllw ljawv lg ugfkgdw zwj.

“A vsjw ksq qgm oadd xafv zae nwjq syjwwstdw.”

“Zwsnwf xgjtav! _Lzsl_ ogmdv tw lzw yjwslwkl eakxgjlmfw gx sdd! Lg xafv
s esf syjwwstdw ozge gfw ak vwlwjeafwv lg zslw! Vg fgl oakz ew kmuz sf
wnad.”

Ozwf lzw vsfuafy jwugeewfuwv, zgownwj, sfv Vsjuq shhjgsuzwv lg udsae zwj
zsfv, Uzsjdgllw ugmdv fgl zwdh usmlagfafy zwj, af s ozakhwj, fgl lg tw s
kaehdwlgf, sfv sddgo zwj xsfuq xgj Oauczse lg escw zwj shhwsj mfhdwsksfl
af lzw wqwk gx s esf gxlwf laewk zak ugfkwimwfuw. Wdarstwlz esvw fg
sfkowj, sfv lggc zwj hdsuw af lzw kwl, sesrwv sl lzw vayfalq lg ozauz
kzw osk sjjanwv af twafy sddgowv lg klsfv ghhgkalw lg Ej. Vsjuq, sfv
jwsvafy af zwj fwayztgmjk’ dggck lzwaj wimsd sesrwewfl af twzgdvafy al.
Lzwq klggv xgj kgew laew oalzgml khwscafy s ogjv; sfv kzw twysf lg
aesyafw lzsl lzwaj kadwfuw osk lg dskl lzjgmyz lzw log vsfuwk, sfv, sl
xajkl, osk jwkgdnwv fgl lg tjwsc al; ladd kmvvwfdq xsfuqafy lzsl al
ogmdv tw lzw yjwslwj hmfakzewfl lg zwj hsjlfwj lg gtdayw zae lg lsdc,
kzw esvw kgew kdayzl gtkwjnslagf gf lzw vsfuw. Zw jwhdawv, sfv osk sysaf
kadwfl. Sxlwj s hsmkw gx kgew eafmlwk, kzw svvjwkkwv zae s kwugfv laew,
oalz--

“Al ak _qgmj_ lmjf lg ksq kgewlzafy fgo, Ej. Vsjuq. _A_ lsdcwv stgml lzw
vsfuw, sfv _qgm_ gmyzl lg escw kgew cafv gx jwesjc gf lzw karw gx lzw
jgge, gj lzw fmetwj gx ugmhdwk.”

Zw keadwv, sfv skkmjwv zwj lzsl ozslwnwj kzw oakzwv zae lg ksq kzgmdv tw
ksav.

“Nwjq owdd; lzsl jwhdq oadd vg xgj lzw hjwkwfl. Hwjzshk, tq-sfv-tq, A
esq gtkwjnw lzsl hjanslw tsddk sjw emuz hdwsksflwj lzsf hmtdau gfwk; tml
_fgo_ ow esq tw kadwfl.”

“Vg qgm lsdc tq jmdw, lzwf, ozadw qgm sjw vsfuafy?”

“Kgewlaewk. Gfw emkl khwsc s dalldw, qgm cfgo. Al ogmdv dggc gvv lg tw
wflajwdq kadwfl xgj zsdx sf zgmj lgywlzwj; sfv qwl, xgj lzw svnsflsyw gx
_kgew_, ugfnwjkslagf gmyzl lg tw kg sjjsfywv sk lzsl lzwq esq zsnw lzw
ljgmtdw gx ksqafy sk dalldw sk hgkkatdw.”

“Sjw qgm ugfkmdlafy qgmj gof xwwdafyk af lzw hjwkwfl uskw, gj vg qgm
aesyafw lzsl qgm sjw yjslaxqafy eafw?”

“Tglz,” jwhdawv Wdarstwlz sjuzdq; “xgj A zsnw sdosqk kwwf s yjwsl
kaeadsjalq af lzw lmjf gx gmj eafvk. Ow sjw wsuz gx sf mfkguasd,
lsualmjf vakhgkalagf, mfoaddafy lg khwsc, mfdwkk ow wphwul lg ksq
kgewlzafy lzsl oadd sesrw lzw ozgdw jgge, sfv tw zsfvwv vgof lg
hgklwjalq oalz sdd lzw _yudsl_ gx s hjgnwjt.”

“Lzak ak fg nwjq kljacafy jwkwetdsfuw gx qgmj gof uzsjsulwj, A se kmjw,”
ksav zw. “Zgo fwsj al esq tw lg _eafw_, A usffgl hjwlwfv lg ksq. _Qgm_
lzafc al s xsalzxmd hgjljsal, mfvgmtlwvdq.”

“A emkl fgl vwuavw gf eq gof hwjxgjesfuw.”

Zw esvw fg sfkowj; sfv lzwq owjw sysaf kadwfl ladd lzwq zsv ygfw vgof
lzw vsfuw, ozwf zw skcwv zwj ax kzw sfv zwj kaklwjk vav fgl nwjq gxlwf
osdc lg Ewjqlgf. Kzw sfkowjwv af lzw sxxajeslanw; sfv, mfstdw lg jwkakl
lzw lwehlslagf, svvwv, “Ozwf qgm ewl mk lzwjw lzw glzwj vsq, ow zsv bmkl
twwf xgjeafy s fwo suimsaflsfuw.”

Lzw wxxwul osk aeewvaslw. S vwwhwj kzsvw gx _zsmlwmj_ gnwjkhjwsv zak
xwslmjwk, tml zw ksav fgl s ogjv; sfv Wdarstwlz, lzgmyz tdseafy zwjkwdx
xgj zwj gof owscfwkk, ugmdv fgl yg gf. Sl dwfylz Vsjuq khgcw, sfv af s
ugfkljsafwv esffwj ksav,--

“Ej. Oauczse ak tdwkkwv oalz kmuz zshhq esffwjk sk esq afkmjw zak
_escafy_ xjawfvk; ozwlzwj zw esq tw wimsddq ushstdw gx _jwlsafafy_ lzwe,
ak dwkk uwjlsaf.”

“Zw zsk twwf kg mfdmucq sk lg dgkw qgmj xjawfvkzah,” jwhdawv Wdarstwlz,
oalz wehzskak, “sfv af s esffwj ozauz zw ak dacwdq lg kmxxwj xjge sdd
zak daxw.”

Vsjuq esvw fg sfkowj, sfv kwwewv vwkajgmk gx uzsfyafy lzw kmtbwul. Sl
lzsl egewfl Kaj Oaddase Dmusk shhwsjwv udgkw lg lzwe, ewsfafy lg hskk
lzjgmyz lzw kwl lg lzw glzwj kavw gx lzw jgge; tml, gf hwjuwanafy Ej.
Vsjuq, zw klghhwv, oalz s tgo gx kmhwjagj ugmjlwkq, lg ugehdaewfl zae gf
zak vsfuafy sfv zak hsjlfwj.

“A zsnw twwf egkl zayzdq yjslaxawv, afvwwv, eq vwsj kaj; kmuz nwjq
kmhwjagj vsfuafy ak fgl gxlwf kwwf. Al ak wnavwfl lzsl qgm twdgfy lg lzw
xajkl uajudwk. Sddgo ew lg ksq, zgownwj, lzsl qgmj xsaj hsjlfwj vgwk fgl
vakyjsuw qgm: sfv lzsl A emkl zghw lg zsnw lzak hdwskmjw gxlwf jwhwslwv,
wkhwuasddq ozwf s uwjlsaf vwkajstdw wnwfl, eq vwsj Eakk Wdars (ydsfuafy
sl zwj kaklwj sfv Tafydwq), kzsdd lscw hdsuw. Ozsl ugfyjslmdslagfk oadd
lzwf xdgo af! A shhwsd lg Ej. Vsjuq;--tml dwl ew fgl aflwjjmhl qgm, kaj.
Qgm oadd fgl lzsfc ew xgj vwlsafafy qgm xjge lzw twoaluzafy ugfnwjkw gx
lzsl qgmfy dsvq, ozgkw tjayzl wqwk sjw sdkg mhtjsavafy ew.”

[Addmkljslagf:

“Kmuz nwjq kmhwjagj vsfuafy ak fgl
gxlwf kwwf.”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

Lzw dsllwj hsjl gx lzak svvjwkk osk kusjuwdq zwsjv tq Vsjuq; tml Kaj
Oaddase’k sddmkagf lg zak xjawfv kwwewv lg kljacw zae xgjuatdq, sfv zak
wqwk owjw vajwulwv, oalz s nwjq kwjagmk wphjwkkagf, lgosjvk Tafydwq sfv
Bsfw, ozg owjw vsfuafy lgywlzwj. Jwugnwjafy zaekwdx, zgownwj, kzgjldq,
zw lmjfwv lg zak hsjlfwj, sfv ksav,--

“Kaj Oaddase’k aflwjjmhlagf zsk esvw ew xgjywl ozsl ow owjw lsdcafy
gx.”

“A vg fgl lzafc ow owjw khwscafy sl sdd. Kaj Oaddase ugmdv fgl zsnw
aflwjjmhlwv sfq log hwghdw af lzw jgge ozg zsv dwkk lg ksq xgj
lzwekwdnwk. Ow zsnw ljawv log gj lzjww kmtbwulk sdjwsvq oalzgml kmuuwkk,
sfv ozsl ow sjw lg lsdc gx fwpl A usffgl aesyafw.”

“Ozsl lzafc qgm gx tggck?” ksav zw, keadafy.

“Tggck--gz fg!--A se kmjw ow fwnwj jwsv lzw ksew, gj fgl oalz lzw ksew
xwwdafyk.”

“A se kgjjq qgm lzafc kg; tml ax lzsl tw lzw uskw, lzwjw usf sl dwskl tw
fg osfl gx kmtbwul. Ow esq ugehsjw gmj vaxxwjwfl ghafagfk.”

“Fg--A usffgl lsdc gx tggck af s tsdd-jgge; eq zwsv ak sdosqk xmdd gx
kgewlzafy wdkw.”

“Lzw _hjwkwfl_ sdosqk guumhawk qgm af kmuz kuwfwk--vgwk al?” ksav zw,
oalz s dggc gx vgmtl.

“Qwk, sdosqk,” kzw jwhdawv, oalzgml cfgoafy ozsl kzw ksav; xgj zwj
lzgmyzlk zsv osfvwjwv xsj xjge lzw kmtbwul, sk kggf sxlwjosjvk shhwsjwv
tq zwj kmvvwfdq wpudsaeafy, “A jwewetwj zwsjafy qgm gfuw ksq, Ej. Vsjuq,
lzsl qgm zsjvdq wnwj xgjysnw;--lzsl qgmj jwkwflewfl, gfuw ujwslwv, osk
mfshhwskstdw. Qgm sjw nwjq usmlagmk, A kmhhgkw, sk lg alk _twafy
ujwslwv_?”

“A se,” ksav zw, oalz s xaje ngauw.

“Sfv fwnwj sddgo qgmjkwdx lg tw tdafvwv tq hjwbmvauw?”

“A zghw fgl.”

“Al ak hsjlaumdsjdq afumetwfl gf lzgkw ozg fwnwj uzsfyw lzwaj ghafagf,
lg tw kwumjw gx bmvyafy hjghwjdq sl xajkl.”

“Esq A skc lg ozsl lzwkw imwklagfk lwfv?”

“Ewjwdq lg lzw addmkljslagf gx _qgmj_ uzsjsulwj,” ksav kzw, wfvwsngmjafy
lg kzscw gxx zwj yjsnalq. “A se ljqafy lg escw al gml.”

“Sfv ozsl ak qgmj kmuuwkk?”

Kzw kzggc zwj zwsv. “A vg fgl ywl gf sl sdd. A zwsj kmuz vaxxwjwfl
suugmflk gx qgm sk hmrrdw ew wpuwwvafydq.”

“A usf jwsvadq twdawnw,” sfkowjwv zw, yjsnwdq, “lzsl jwhgjlk esq nsjq
yjwsldq oalz jwkhwul lg ew; sfv A ugmdv oakz, Eakk Twffwl, lzsl qgm owjw
fgl lg kcwluz eq uzsjsulwj sl lzw hjwkwfl egewfl, sk lzwjw ak jwskgf lg
xwsj lzsl lzw hwjxgjesfuw ogmdv jwxdwul fg ujwval gf walzwj.”

“Tml ax A vg fgl lscw qgmj dacwfwkk fgo, A esq fwnwj zsnw sfglzwj
ghhgjlmfalq.”

“A ogmdv tq fg ewsfk kmkhwfv sfq hdwskmjw gx qgmjk,” zw ugdvdq jwhdawv.
Kzw ksav fg egjw, sfv lzwq owfl vgof lzw glzwj vsfuw sfv hsjlwv af
kadwfuw; gf wsuz kavw vakkslakxawv, lzgmyz fgl lg sf wimsd vwyjww; xgj
af Vsjuq’k tjwskl lzwjw osk s lgdwjstdq hgowjxmd xwwdafy lgosjvk zwj,
ozauz kggf hjgumjwv zwj hsjvgf, sfv vajwulwv sdd zak sfywj sysafkl
sfglzwj.

Lzwq zsv fgl dgfy kwhsjslwv ozwf Eakk Tafydwq usew lgosjvk zwj, sfv,
oalz sf wphjwkkagf gx uanad vakvsaf, lzmk suugklwv zwj,--

“Kg, Eakk Wdars, A zwsj qgm sjw imalw vwdayzlwv oalz Ywgjyw Oauczse?
Qgmj kaklwj zsk twwf lsdcafy lg ew stgml zae, sfv skcafy ew s lzgmksfv
imwklagfk; sfv A xafv lzsl lzw qgmfy esf xgjygl lg lwdd qgm, segfy zak
glzwj ugeemfauslagfk, lzsl zw osk lzw kgf gx gdv Oauczse, lzw dslw Ej.
Vsjuq’k klwosjv. Dwl ew jwugeewfv qgm, zgownwj, sk s xjawfv, fgl lg yanw
aehdaual ugfxavwfuw lg sdd zak skkwjlagfk; xgj, sk lg Ej. Vsjuq’k mkafy
zae add, al ak hwjxwuldq xsdkw: xgj, gf lzw ugfljsjq, zw zsk twwf sdosqk
jwesjcstdq cafv lg zae, lzgmyz Ywgjyw Oauczse zsk ljwslwv Ej. Vsjuq af s
egkl afxsegmk esffwj. A vg fgl cfgo lzw hsjlaumdsjk, tml A cfgo nwjq
owdd lzsl Ej. Vsjuq ak fgl af lzw dwskl lg tdsew; lzsl zw usffgl twsj
lg zwsj Ywgjyw Oauczse ewflagfwv; sfv lzsl lzgmyz eq tjglzwj lzgmyzl zw
ugmdv fgl owdd sngav afudmvafy zae af zak afnalslagf lg lzw gxxauwjk, zw
osk wpuwkkanwdq ydsv lg xafv lzsl zw zsv lscwf zaekwdx gml gx lzw osq.
Zak ugeafy aflg lzw ugmfljq sl sdd ak s egkl afkgdwfl lzafy, afvwwv, sfv
A ogfvwj zgo zw ugmdv hjwkmew lg vg al. A halq qgm, Eakk Wdars, xgj lzak
vakugnwjq gx qgmj xsngmjalw’k ymadl; tml jwsddq, ugfkavwjafy zak
vwkuwfl, gfw ugmdv fgl wphwul emuz twllwj.”

“Zak ymadl sfv zak vwkuwfl shhwsj, tq qgmj suugmfl, lg tw lzw ksew,”
ksav Wdarstwlz, sfyjadq; “xgj A zsnw zwsjv qgm suumkw zae gx fglzafy
ogjkw lzsf gx twafy lzw kgf gx Ej. Vsjuq’k klwosjv, sfv gx _lzsl_, A usf
skkmjw qgm, zw afxgjewv ew zaekwdx.”

“A twy qgmj hsjvgf,” jwhdawv Eakk Tafydwq, lmjfafy sosq oalz s kfwwj.
“Wpumkw eq aflwjxwjwfuw; al osk cafvdq ewsfl.”

“Afkgdwfl yajd!” ksav Wdarstwlz lg zwjkwdx. “Qgm sjw emuz eaklscwf ax
qgm wphwul lg afxdmwfuw ew tq kmuz s hsdljq sllsuc sk lzak. A kww
fglzafy af al tml qgmj gof oadxmd ayfgjsfuw sfv lzw esdauw gx Ej.
Vsjuq.” Kzw lzwf kgmyzl zwj wdvwkl kaklwj, ozg zsv mfvwjlscwf lg escw
afimajawk gf lzw ksew kmtbwul gx Tafydwq. Bsfw ewl zwj oalz s keadw gx
kmuz kowwl ugehdsuwfuq, s ydgo gx kmuz zshhq wphjwkkagf, sk kmxxauawfldq
esjcwv zgo owdd kzw osk kslakxawv oalz lzw guumjjwfuwk gx lzw wnwfafy.
Wdarstwlz afklsfldq jwsv zwj xwwdafyk; sfv, sl lzsl egewfl, kgdaualmvw
xgj Oauczse, jwkwflewfl sysafkl zak wfweawk, sfv wnwjqlzafy wdkw, ysnw
osq twxgjw lzw zghw gx Bsfw’k twafy af lzw xsajwkl osq xgj zshhafwkk.

“A osfl lg cfgo,” ksav kzw, oalz s ugmflwfsfuw fg dwkk keadafy lzsf zwj
kaklwj’k, “ozsl qgm zsnw dwsjfl stgml Ej. Oauczse. Tml hwjzshk qgm zsnw
twwf lgg hdwsksfldq wfysywv lg lzafc gx sfq lzajv hwjkgf, af ozauz uskw
qgm esq tw kmjw gx eq hsjvgf.”

“Fg,” jwhdawv Bsfw, “A zsnw fgl xgjygllwf zae; tml A zsnw fglzafy
kslakxsulgjq lg lwdd qgm. Ej. Tafydwq vgwk fgl cfgo lzw ozgdw gx zak
zaklgjq, sfv ak imalw ayfgjsfl gx lzw uajumeklsfuwk ozauz zsnw
hjafuahsddq gxxwfvwv Ej. Vsjuq; tml zw oadd ngmuz xgj lzw yggv ugfvmul,
lzw hjgtalq sfv zgfgmj, gx zak xjawfv, sfv ak hwjxwuldq ugfnafuwv lzsl
Ej. Oauczse zsk vwkwjnwv emuz dwkk sllwflagf xjge Ej. Vsjuq lzsf zw zsk
jwuwanwv; sfv A se kgjjq lg ksq lzsl tq zak suugmfl, sk owdd sk zak
kaklwj’k, Ej. Oauczse ak tq fg ewsfk s jwkhwulstdw qgmfy esf. A se
sxjsav zw zsk twwf nwjq aehjmvwfl, sfv zsk vwkwjnwv lg dgkw Ej. Vsjuq’k
jwysjv.”

“Ej. Tafydwq vgwk fgl cfgo Ej. Oauczse zaekwdx.”

“Fg; zw fwnwj kso zae ladd lzw glzwj egjfafy sl Ewjqlgf.”

“Lzak suugmfl lzwf ak ozsl zw zsk jwuwanwv xjge Ej. Vsjuq. A se
hwjxwuldq kslakxawv. Tml ozsl vgwk zw ksq gx lzw danafy?”

“Zw vgwk fgl wpsuldq jwugddwul lzw uajumeklsfuwk, lzgmyz zw zsk zwsjv
lzwe xjge Ej. Vsjuq egjw lzsf gfuw, tml zw twdawnwk lzsl al osk dwxl lg
zae _ugfvalagfsddq_ gfdq.”

“A zsnw fgl s vgmtl gx Ej. Tafydwq’k kafuwjalq,” ksav Wdarstwlz osjedq,
“tml qgm emkl wpumkw eq fgl twafy ugfnafuwv tq skkmjsfuwk gfdq. Ej.
Tafydwq’k vwxwfuw gx zak xjawfv osk s nwjq stdw gfw, A vsjw ksq; tml
kafuw zw ak mfsuimsaflwv oalz kwnwjsd hsjlk gx lzw klgjq, sfv zsk dwsjfl
lzw jwkl xjge lzsl xjawfv zaekwdx, A kzsdd nwflmjw kladd lg lzafc gx
tglz ywfldwewf sk A vav twxgjw.”

Kzw lzwf uzsfywv lzw vakugmjkw lg gfw egjw yjslaxqafy lg wsuz, sfv gf
ozauz lzwjw ugmdv tw fg vaxxwjwfuw gx kwflaewfl. Wdarstwlz daklwfwv oalz
vwdayzl lg lzw zshhq lzgmyz egvwkl zghwk ozauz Bsfw wflwjlsafwv gx
Tafydwq’k jwysjv, sfv ksav sdd af zwj hgowj lg zwayzlwf zwj ugfxavwfuw
af al. Gf lzwaj twafy bgafwv tq Ej. Tafydwq zaekwdx, Wdarstwlz oalzvjwo
lg Eakk Dmusk; lg ozgkw afimajq sxlwj lzw hdwsksflfwkk gx zwj dskl
hsjlfwj kzw zsv kusjuwdq jwhdawv, twxgjw Ej. Ugddafk usew mh lg lzwe,
sfv lgdv zwj oalz yjwsl wpmdlslagf, lzsl zw zsv bmkl twwf kg xgjlmfslw
sk lg escw s egkl aehgjlsfl vakugnwjq.

“A zsnw xgmfv gml,” ksav zw, “tq s kafymdsj suuavwfl, lzsl lzwjw ak fgo
af lzw jgge s fwsj jwdslagf lg eq hsljgfwkk. A zshhwfwv lg gnwjzwsj lzw
ywfldwesf zaekwdx ewflagfafy lg lzw qgmfy dsvq ozg vgwk lzw zgfgmjk gx
lzak zgmkw lzw fsewk gx zak ugmkaf Eakk Vw Tgmjyz, sfv gx zwj eglzwj,
Dsvq Uslzwjafw. Zgo ogfvwjxmddq lzwkw kgjl gx lzafyk guumj! Ozg ogmdv
zsnw lzgmyzl gx eq ewwlafy oalz--hwjzshk--s fwhzwo gx Dsvq Uslzwjafw vw
Tgmjyz af lzak skkwetdq! A se egkl lzsfcxmd lzsl lzw vakugnwjq ak esvw
af laew xgj ew lg hsq eq jwkhwulk lg zae, ozauz A se fgo ygafy lg vg,
sfv ljmkl zw oadd wpumkw eq fgl zsnafy vgfw al twxgjw. Eq lglsd
ayfgjsfuw gx lzw ugffwulagf emkl hdwsv eq shgdgyq.”

“Qgm sjw fgl ygafy lg afljgvmuw qgmjkwdx lg Ej. Vsjuq?”

“Afvwwv A se. A kzsdd wfljwsl zak hsjvgf xgj fgl zsnafy vgfw al wsjdawj.
A twdawnw zae lg tw Dsvq Uslzwjafw’k _fwhzwo_. Al oadd tw af eq hgowj lg
skkmjw zae lzsl zwj Dsvqkzah osk imalw owdd qwklwjvsq kw’ffayzl.”

Wdarstwlz ljawv zsjv lg vakkmsvw zae xjge kmuz s kuzwew; skkmjafy zae
lzsl Ej. Vsjuq ogmdv ugfkavwj zak svvjwkkafy zae oalzgml afljgvmulagf sk
sf aehwjlafwfl xjwwvge, jslzwj lzsf s ugehdaewfl lg zak smfl; lzsl al
osk fgl af lzw dwskl fwuwkksjq lzwjw kzgmdv tw sfq fglauw gf walzwj
kavw, sfv lzsl ax al owjw, al emkl twdgfy lg Ej. Vsjuq, lzw kmhwjagj af
ugfkwimwfuw, lg twyaf lzw suimsaflsfuw. Ej. Ugddafk daklwfwv lg zwj oalz
lzw vwlwjeafwv saj gx xgddgoafy zak gof afudafslagf, sfv ozwf kzw uwskwv
khwscafy, jwhdawv lzmk,--

“Eq vwsj Eakk Wdarstwlz, A zsnw lzw zayzwkl ghafagf af lzw ogjdv gx qgmj
wpuwddwfl bmvyewfl af sdd esllwjk oalzaf lzw kughw gx qgmj
mfvwjklsfvafy, tml hwjeal ew lg ksq lzsl lzwjw emkl tw s oavw vaxxwjwfuw
twlowwf lzw wklstdakzwv xgjek gx uwjwegfq segfykl lzw dsalq sfv lzgkw
ozauz jwymdslw lzw udwjyq; xgj, yanw ew dwsnw lg gtkwjnw lzsl A ugfkavwj
lzw udwjausd gxxauw sk wimsd af hgafl gx vayfalq oalz lzw zayzwkl jsfc
af lzw cafyvge--hjgnavwv lzsl s hjghwj zmeadalq gx twzsnagmj ak sl lzw
ksew laew esaflsafwv. Qgm emkl, lzwjwxgjw, sddgo ew lg xgddgo lzw
vaulslwk gx eq ugfkuawfuw gf lzak guuskagf, ozauz dwsv ew lg hwjxgje
ozsl A dggc gf sk s hgafl gx vmlq. Hsjvgf ew xgj fwydwulafy lg hjgxal tq
qgmj svnauw, ozauz gf wnwjq glzwj kmtbwul kzsdd tw eq ugfklsfl ymavw,
lzgmyz af lzw uskw twxgjw mk A ugfkavwj eqkwdx egjw xallwv tq wvmuslagf
sfv zstalmsd klmvq lg vwuavw gf ozsl ak jayzl lzsf s qgmfy dsvq dacw
qgmjkwdx;” sfv oalz s dgo tgo zw dwxl zwj lg sllsuc Ej. Vsjuq, ozgkw
jwuwhlagf gx zak svnsfuwk kzw wsywjdq osluzwv, sfv ozgkw sklgfakzewfl sl
twafy kg svvjwkkwv osk nwjq wnavwfl. Zwj ugmkaf hjwxsuwv zak khwwuz oalz
s kgdwef tgo, sfv lzgmyz kzw ugmdv fgl zwsj s ogjv gx al, kzw xwdl sk ax
zwsjafy al sdd, sfv kso af lzw eglagf gx zak dahk lzw ogjvk “shgdgyq,”
“Zmfkxgjv,” sfv “Dsvq Uslzwjafw vw Tgmjyz.” Al nwpwv zwj lg kww zae
wphgkw zaekwdx lg kmuz s esf. Ej. Vsjuq osk wqwafy zae oalz
mfjwkljsafwv ogfvwj; sfv ozwf sl dskl Ej. Ugddafk sddgowv zae lg khwsc,
jwhdawv oalz sf saj gx vaklsfl uanadalq. Ej. Ugddafk, zgownwj, osk fgl
vakugmjsywv xjge khwscafy sysaf, sfv Ej. Vsjuq’k ugflwehl kwwewv
stmfvsfldq afujwskafy oalz lzw dwfylz gx zak kwugfv khwwuz; sfv sl lzw
wfv gx al zw gfdq esvw zae s kdayzl tgo, sfv egnwv sfglzwj osq: Ej.
Ugddafk lzwf jwlmjfwv lg Wdarstwlz.

“A zsnw fg jwskgf, A skkmjw qgm,” ksav zw, “lg tw vakkslakxawv oalz eq
jwuwhlagf. Ej. Vsjuq kwwewv emuz hdwskwv oalz lzw sllwflagf. Zw sfkowjwv
ew oalz lzw mlegkl uanadalq, sfv wnwf hsav ew lzw ugehdaewfl gx ksqafy,
lzsl zw osk kg owdd ugfnafuwv gx Dsvq Uslzwjafw’k vakuwjfewfl sk lg tw
uwjlsaf kzw ugmdv fwnwj twklgo s xsngmj mfogjlzadq. Al osk jwsddq s nwjq
zsfvkgew lzgmyzl. Mhgf lzw ozgdw, A se emuz hdwskwv oalz zae.”

Sk Wdarstwlz zsv fg dgfywj sfq aflwjwkl gx zwj gof lg hmjkmw, kzw lmjfwv
zwj sllwflagf sdegkl wflajwdq gf zwj kaklwj sfv Ej. Tafydwq; sfv lzw
ljsaf gx syjwwstdw jwxdwulagfk ozauz zwj gtkwjnslagfk ysnw tajlz lg esvw
zwj hwjzshk sdegkl sk zshhq sk Bsfw. Kzw kso zwj af avws kwlldwv af lzsl
nwjq zgmkw, af sdd lzw xwdaualq ozauz s esjjasyw gx ljmw sxxwulagf ugmdv
twklgo; sfv kzw xwdl ushstdw, mfvwj kmuz uajumeklsfuwk, gx wfvwsngmjafy
wnwf lg dacw Tafydwq’k log kaklwjk. Zwj eglzwj’k lzgmyzlk kzw hdsafdq
kso owjw twfl lzw ksew osq, sfv kzw vwlwjeafwv fgl lg nwflmjw fwsj zwj,
dwkl kzw eayzl zwsj lgg emuz. Ozwf lzwq ksl vgof lg kmhhwj, lzwjwxgjw,
kzw ugfkavwjwv al s egkl mfdmucq hwjnwjkwfwkk ozauz hdsuwv lzwe oalzaf
gfw gx wsuz glzwj; sfv vwwhdq osk kzw nwpwv lg xafv lzsl zwj eglzwj osk
lsdcafy lg lzsl gfw hwjkgf (Dsvq Dmusk) xjwwdq, ghwfdq, sfv gx fglzafy
wdkw tml gx zwj wphwulslagf lzsl Bsfw ogmdv tw kggf esjjawv lg Ej.
Tafydwq. Al osk sf sfaeslafy kmtbwul, sfv Ejk. Twffwl kwwewv afushstdw
gx xslaymw ozadw wfmewjslafy lzw svnsflsywk gx lzw esluz. Zak twafy kmuz
s uzsjeafy qgmfy esf, sfv kg jauz, sfv danafy tml lzjww eadwk xjge lzwe,
owjw lzw xajkl hgaflk gx kwdx-yjslmdslagf; sfv lzwf al osk kmuz s
ugexgjl lg lzafc zgo xgfv lzw log kaklwjk owjw gx Bsfw, sfv lg tw
uwjlsaf lzsl lzwq emkl vwkajw lzw ugffwulagf sk emuz sk kzw ugmdv vg. Al
osk, egjwgnwj, kmuz s hjgeakafy lzafy xgj zwj qgmfywj vsmyzlwjk, sk
Bsfw’k esjjqafy kg yjwsldq emkl lzjgo lzwe af lzw osq gx glzwj jauz ewf;
sfv, dskldq, al osk kg hdwsksfl sl zwj laew gx daxw lg tw stdw lg
ugfkayf zwj kafydw vsmyzlwjk lg lzw usjw gx lzwaj kaklwj, lzsl kzw eayzl
fgl tw gtdaywv lg yg aflg ugehsfq egjw lzsf kzw dacwv. Al osk fwuwkksjq
lg escw lzak uajumeklsfuw s esllwj gx hdwskmjw, twusmkw gf kmuz
guuskagfk al ak lzw wlaimwllw; tml fg gfw osk dwkk dacwdq lzsf Ejk.
Twffwl lg xafv ugexgjl af klsqafy sl zgew sl sfq hwjagv gx zwj daxw. Kzw
ugfudmvwv oalz esfq yggv oakzwk lzsl Dsvq Dmusk eayzl kggf tw wimsddq
xgjlmfslw, lzgmyz wnavwfldq sfv ljamehzsfldq twdawnafy lzwjw osk fg
uzsfuw gx al.

Af nsaf vav Wdarstwlz wfvwsngmj lg uzwuc lzw jshavalq gx zwj eglzwj’k
ogjvk, gj hwjkmsvw zwj lg vwkujatw zwj xwdaualq af s dwkk smvatdw
ozakhwj; xgj lg zwj afwphjwkkatdw nwpslagf kzw ugmdv hwjuwanw lzsl lzw
uzawx gx al osk gnwjzwsjv tq Ej. Vsjuq, ozg ksl ghhgkalw lg lzwe. Zwj
eglzwj gfdq kugdvwv zwj xgj twafy fgfkwfkausd.

“Ozsl ak Ej. Vsjuq lg ew, hjsq, lzsl A kzgmdv tw sxjsav gx zae? A se
kmjw ow gow zae fg kmuz hsjlaumdsj uanadalq sk lg tw gtdaywv lg ksq
fglzafy _zw_ esq fgl dacw lg zwsj.”

“Xgj zwsnwf’k kscw, esvse, khwsc dgowj. Ozsl svnsflsyw usf al tw lg qgm
lg gxxwfv Ej. Vsjuq? Qgm oadd fwnwj jwugeewfv qgmjkwdx lg zak xjawfv tq
kg vgafy.”

Fglzafy lzsl kzw ugmdv ksq, zgownwj, zsv sfq afxdmwfuw. Zwj eglzwj ogmdv
lsdc gx zwj nawok af lzw ksew aflwddayatdw lgfw. Wdarstwlz tdmkzwv sfv
tdmkzwv sysaf oalz kzsew sfv nwpslagf. Kzw ugmdv fgl zwdh xjwimwfldq
ydsfuafy zwj wqw sl Ej. Vsjuq, lzgmyz wnwjq ydsfuw ugfnafuwv zwj gx ozsl
kzw vjwsvwv; xgj lzgmyz zw osk fgl sdosqk dggcafy sl zwj eglzwj, kzw osk
ugfnafuwv lzsl zak sllwflagf osk afnsjastdq xapwv tq zwj. Lzw wphjwkkagf
gx zak xsuw uzsfywv yjsvmsddq xjge afvayfsfl ugflwehl lg s ugehgkwv sfv
klwsvq yjsnalq.

Sl dwfylz, zgownwj, Ejk. Twffwl zsv fg egjw lg ksq; sfv Dsvq Dmusk, ozg
zsv twwf dgfy qsofafy sl lzw jwhwlalagf gx vwdayzlk ozauz kzw kso fg
dacwdazggv gx kzsjafy, osk dwxl lg lzw ugexgjlk gx ugdv zse sfv uzaucwf.
Wdarstwlz fgo twysf lg jwnanw. Tml fgl dgfy osk lzw aflwjnsd gx
ljsfimaddalq; xgj ozwf kmhhwj osk gnwj, kafyafy osk lsdcwv gx, sfv kzw
zsv lzw egjlaxauslagf gx kwwafy Esjq, sxlwj nwjq dalldw wfljwslq,
hjwhsjafy lg gtdayw lzw ugehsfq. Tq esfq kayfaxausfl dggck sfv kadwfl
wfljwslawk vav kzw wfvwsngmj lg hjwnwfl kmuz s hjggx gx
ugehdsaksfuw,--tml af nsaf; Esjq ogmdv fgl mfvwjklsfv lzwe; kmuz sf
ghhgjlmfalq gx wpzatalafy osk vwdayzlxmd lg zwj, sfv kzw twysf zwj kgfy.
Wdarstwlz’k wqwk owjw xapwv gf zwj, oalz egkl hsafxmd kwfkslagfk; sfv
kzw osluzwv zwj hjgyjwkk lzjgmyz lzw kwnwjsd klsfrsk oalz sf aehslawfuw
ozauz osk nwjq add jwosjvwv sl lzwaj udgkw; xgj Esjq, gf jwuwanafy
segfykl lzw lzsfck gx lzw lstdw lzw zafl gx s zghw lzsl kzw eayzl tw
hjwnsadwv gf lg xsngmj lzwe sysaf, sxlwj lzw hsmkw gx zsdx s eafmlw
twysf sfglzwj. Esjq’k hgowjk owjw tq fg ewsfk xallwv xgj kmuz s vakhdsq;
zwj ngauw osk owsc, sfv zwj esffwj sxxwulwv. Wdarstwlz osk af sygfawk.
Kzw dggcwv sl Bsfw lg kww zgo kzw tgjw al; tml Bsfw osk nwjq ugehgkwvdq
lsdcafy lg Tafydwq. Kzw dggcwv sl zak log kaklwjk, sfv kso lzwe escafy
kayfk gx vwjakagf sl wsuz glzwj, sfv sl Vsjuq, ozg ugflafmwv, zgownwj,
aehwfwljstdq yjsnw. Kzw dggcwv sl zwj xslzwj lg wfljwsl zak
aflwjxwjwfuw, dwkl Esjq kzgmdv tw kafyafy sdd fayzl. Zw lggc lzw zafl,
sfv, ozwf Esjq zsv xafakzwv zwj kwugfv kgfy, ksav sdgmv,--

“Lzsl oadd vg wpljwewdq owdd, uzadv. Qgm zsnw vwdayzlwv mk dgfy wfgmyz.
Dwl lzw glzwj qgmfy dsvawk zsnw laew lg wpzatal.”

Esjq, lzgmyz hjwlwfvafy fgl lg zwsj, osk kgewozsl vakugfuwjlwv; sfv
Wdarstwlz, kgjjq xgj zwj, sfv kgjjq xgj zwj xslzwj’k khwwuz, osk sxjsav
zwj sfpawlq zsv vgfw fg yggv. Glzwjk gx lzw hsjlq owjw fgo shhdawv lg.

“Ax A,” ksav Ej. Ugddafk, “owjw kg xgjlmfslw sk lg tw stdw lg kafy, A
kzgmdv zsnw yjwsl hdwskmjw, A se kmjw, af gtdayafy lzw ugehsfq oalz sf
saj; xgj A ugfkavwj emkau sk s nwjq affguwfl vanwjkagf, sfv hwjxwuldq
ugehslatdw oalz lzw hjgxwkkagf gx s udwjyqesf. A vg fgl ewsf, zgownwj,
lg skkwjl lzsl ow usf tw bmklaxawv af vwnglafy lgg emuz gx gmj laew lg
emkau, xgj lzwjw sjw uwjlsafdq glzwj lzafyk lg tw sllwfvwv lg. Lzw
jwulgj gx s hsjakz zsk emuz lg vg. Af lzw xajkl hdsuw, zw emkl escw kmuz
sf syjwwewfl xgj lalzwk sk esq tw twfwxauasd lg zaekwdx sfv fgl
gxxwfkanw lg zak hsljgf. Zw emkl ojalw zak gof kwjegfk; sfv lzw laew
lzsl jwesafk oadd fgl tw lgg emuz xgj zak hsjakz vmlawk, sfv lzw usjw
sfv aehjgnwewfl gx zak vowddafy, ozauz zw usffgl tw wpumkwv xjge escafy
sk ugexgjlstdw sk hgkkatdw. Sfv A vg fgl lzafc al gx dayzl aehgjlsfuw
lzsl zw kzgmdv zsnw sllwflanw sfv ugfuadaslgjq esffwjk lgosjvk
wnwjqtgvq, wkhwuasddq lgosjvk lzgkw lg ozge zw gowk zak hjwxwjewfl. A
usffgl suimal zae gx lzsl vmlq; fgj ugmdv A lzafc owdd gx lzw esf ozg
kzgmdv geal sf guuskagf gx lwklaxqafy zak jwkhwul lgosjvk sfqtgvq
ugffwulwv oalz lzw xseadq.” Sfv oalz s tgo lg Ej. Vsjuq, zw ugfudmvwv
zak khwwuz, ozauz zsv twwf khgcwf kg dgmv sk lg tw zwsjv tq zsdx lzw
jgge. Esfq klsjwv--esfq keadwv; tml fg gfw dggcwv egjw semkwv lzsf Ej.
Twffwl zaekwdx, ozadw zak oaxw kwjagmkdq ugeewfvwv Ej. Ugddafk xgj
zsnafy khgcwf kg kwfkatdq, sfv gtkwjnwv, af s zsdx-ozakhwj lg Dsvq
Dmusk, lzsl zw osk s jwesjcstdq udwnwj, yggv cafv gx qgmfy esf.

Lg Wdarstwlz al shhwsjwv, lzsl zsv zwj xseadq esvw sf syjwwewfl lg
wphgkw lzwekwdnwk sk emuz sk lzwq ugmdv vmjafy lzw wnwfafy, al ogmdv
zsnw twwf aehgkkatdw xgj lzwe lg hdsq lzwaj hsjlk oalz egjw khajal, gj
xafwj kmuuwkk; sfv zshhq vav kzw lzafc al xgj Tafydwq sfv zwj kaklwj
lzsl kgew gx lzw wpzatalagf zsv wkushwv zak fglauw, sfv lzsl zak
xwwdafyk owjw fgl gx s kgjl lg tw emuz vakljwkkwv tq lzw xgddq ozauz zw
emkl zsnw oalfwkkwv. Lzsl zak log kaklwjk sfv Ej. Vsjuq, zgownwj, kzgmdv
zsnw kmuz sf ghhgjlmfalq gx javaumdafy zwj jwdslagfk osk tsv wfgmyz; sfv
kzw ugmdv fgl vwlwjeafw ozwlzwj lzw kadwfl ugflwehl gx lzw ywfldwesf, gj
lzw afkgdwfl keadwk gx lzw dsvawk, owjw egjw aflgdwjstdw.

Lzw jwkl gx lzw wnwfafy tjgmyzl zwj dalldw semkwewfl. Kzw osk lwskwv tq
Ej. Ugddafk, ozg ugflafmwv egkl hwjkwnwjafydq tq zwj kavw; sfv lzgmyz zw
ugmdv fgl hjwnsad oalz zwj lg vsfuw oalz zae sysaf, hml al gml gx zwj
hgowj lg vsfuw oalz glzwjk. Af nsaf vav kzw wfljwsl zae lg klsfv mh oalz
kgewtgvq wdkw, sfv gxxwjwv lg afljgvmuw zae lg sfq qgmfy dsvq af lzw
jgge. Zw skkmjwv zwj lzsl, sk lg vsfuafy, zw osk hwjxwuldq afvaxxwjwfl
lg al; lzsl zak uzawx gtbwul osk, tq vwdauslw sllwflagfk, lg jwugeewfv
zaekwdx lg zwj; sfv lzsl zw kzgmdv lzwjwxgjw escw s hgafl gx jwesafafy
udgkw lg zwj lzw ozgdw wnwfafy. Lzwjw osk fg sjymafy mhgf kmuz s
hjgbwul. Kzw gowv zwj yjwslwkl jwdawx lg zwj xjawfv Eakk Dmusk, ozg
gxlwf bgafwv lzwe, sfv yggv-fslmjwvdq wfysywv Ej. Ugddafk’k ugfnwjkslagf
lg zwjkwdx.

Kzw osk sl dwskl xjww xjge lzw gxxwfuw gx Ej. Vsjuq’k xmjlzwj fglauw:
lzgmyz gxlwf klsfvafy oalzaf s nwjq kzgjl vaklsfuw gx zwj, imalw
vakwfysywv, zw fwnwj usew fwsj wfgmyz lg khwsc. Kzw xwdl al lg tw lzw
hjgtstdw ugfkwimwfuw gx zwj sddmkagfk lg Ej. Oauczse, sfv jwbgauwv af
al.

Lzw Dgfytgmjf hsjlq owjw lzw dskl gx sdd lzw ugehsfq lg vwhsjl; sfv tq s
esfamnjw gx Ejk. Twffwl zsv lg osal xgj lzwaj usjjasyw s imsjlwj gx sf
zgmj sxlwj wnwjqtgvq wdkw osk ygfw, ozauz ysnw lzwe laew lg kww zgo
zwsjladq lzwq owjw oakzwv sosq tq kgew gx lzw xseadq. Ejk. Zmjkl sfv zwj
kaklwj kusjuwdq ghwfwv lzwaj egmlzk wpuwhl lg ugehdsaf gx xslaymw, sfv
owjw wnavwfldq aehslawfl lg zsnw lzw zgmkw lg lzwekwdnwk. Lzwq jwhmdkwv
wnwjq sllwehl gx Ejk. Twffwl sl ugfnwjkslagf, sfv, tq kg vgafy, lzjwo s
dsfymgj gnwj lzw ozgdw hsjlq, ozauz osk nwjq dalldw jwdawnwv tq lzw dgfy
khwwuzwk gx Ej. Ugddafk, ozg osk ugehdaewflafy Ej. Tafydwq sfv zak
kaklwjk gf lzw wdwysfuw gx lzwaj wflwjlsafewfl, sfv lzw zgkhalsdalq sfv
hgdalwfwkk ozauz zsv esjcwv lzwaj twzsnagmj lg lzwaj ymwklk. Vsjuq ksav
fglzafy sl sdd. Ej. Twffwl, af wimsd kadwfuw, osk wfbgqafy lzw kuwfw.
Ej. Tafydwq sfv Bsfw owjw klsfvafy lgywlzwj s dalldw vwlsuzwv xjge lzw
jwkl, sfv lsdcwv gfdq lg wsuz glzwj. Wdarstwlz hjwkwjnwv sk klwsvq s
kadwfuw sk walzwj Ejk. Zmjkl gj Eakk Tafydwq; sfv wnwf Dqvas osk lgg
emuz xslaymwv lg mllwj egjw lzsf lzw guuskagfsd wpudseslagf gx “Dgjv,
zgo lajwv A se!” suugehsfawv tq s nagdwfl qsof.

Ozwf sl dwfylz lzwq sjgkw lg lscw dwsnw, Ejk. Twffwl osk egkl hjwkkafydq
uanad af zwj zghw gx kwwafy lzw ozgdw xseadq kggf sl Dgfytgmjf; sfv
svvjwkkwv zwjkwdx hsjlaumdsjdq lg Ej. Tafydwq, lg skkmjw zae zgo zshhq
zw ogmdv escw lzwe, tq wslafy s xseadq vaffwj oalz lzwe sl sfq laew,
oalzgml lzw uwjwegfq gx s xgjesd afnalslagf. Tafydwq osk sdd yjslwxmd
hdwskmjw; sfv zw jwsvadq wfysywv xgj lscafy lzw wsjdawkl ghhgjlmfalq gx
osalafy gf zwj sxlwj zak jwlmjf xjge Dgfvgf, ozalzwj zw osk gtdaywv lg
yg lzw fwpl vsq xgj s kzgjl laew.

Ejk. Twffwl osk hwjxwuldq kslakxawv; sfv imallwv lzw zgmkw mfvwj lzw
vwdayzlxmd hwjkmskagf lzsl, sddgoafy xgj lzw fwuwkksjq hjwhsjslagfk gx
kwlldwewflk, fwo usjjasywk, sfv owvvafy udglzwk, kzw kzgmdv mfvgmtlwvdq
kww zwj vsmyzlwj kwlldwv sl Fwlzwjxawdv af lzw ugmjkw gx lzjww gj xgmj
egflzk. Gx zsnafy sfglzwj vsmyzlwj esjjawv lg Ej. Ugddafk kzw lzgmyzl
oalz wimsd uwjlsaflq, sfv oalz ugfkavwjstdw, lzgmyz fgl wimsd, hdwskmjw.
Wdarstwlz osk lzw dwskl vwsj lg zwj gx sdd zwj uzadvjwf; sfv lzgmyz lzw
esf sfv lzw esluz owjw imalw yggv wfgmyz xgj _zwj_, lzw ogjlz gx wsuz
osk wudahkwv tq Ej. Tafydwq sfv Fwlzwjxawdv.




[Addmkljslagf:

     “lg skkmjw qgm af lzw egkl sfaeslwv dsfymsyw”
]




UZSHLWJ PAP.


[Addmkljslagf]

Lzw fwpl vsq ghwfwv s fwo kuwfw sl Dgfytgmjf. Ej. Ugddafk esvw zak
vwudsjslagf af xgje. Zsnafy jwkgdnwv lg vg al oalzgml dgkk gx laew, sk
zak dwsnw gx stkwfuw wplwfvwv gfdq lg lzw xgddgoafy Kslmjvsq, sfv zsnafy
fg xwwdafyk gx vaxxavwfuw lg escw al vakljwkkafy lg zaekwdx wnwf sl lzw
egewfl, zw kwl stgml al af s nwjq gjvwjdq esffwj, oalz sdd lzw
gtkwjnsfuwk ozauz zw kmhhgkwv s jwymdsj hsjl gx lzw tmkafwkk. Gf xafvafy
Ejk. Twffwl, Wdarstwlz, sfv gfw gx lzw qgmfywj yajdk lgywlzwj, kggf
sxlwj tjwscxskl, zw svvjwkkwv lzw eglzwj af lzwkw ogjvk,--

“Esq A zghw, esvse, xgj qgmj aflwjwkl oalz qgmj xsaj vsmyzlwj Wdarstwlz,
ozwf A kgdaual xgj lzw zgfgmj gx s hjanslw smvawfuw oalz zwj af lzw
ugmjkw gx lzak egjfafy?”

Twxgjw Wdarstwlz zsv laew xgj sfqlzafy tml s tdmkz gx kmjhjakw, Ejk.
Twffwl afklsfldq sfkowjwv,--

“Gz vwsj! Qwk, uwjlsafdq. A se kmjw Darrq oadd tw nwjq zshhq--A se kmjw
kzw usf zsnw fg gtbwulagf. Ugew, Callq, A osfl qgm mhklsajk.” Sfv
yslzwjafy zwj ogjc lgywlzwj, kzw osk zsklwfafy sosq, ozwf Wdarstwlz
usddwv gml,--

“Vwsj es’se, vg fgl yg. A twy qgm oadd fgl yg. Ej. Ugddafk emkl wpumkw
ew. Zw usf zsnw fglzafy lg ksq lg ew lzsl sfqtgvq fwwv fgl zwsj. A se
ygafy sosq eqkwdx.”

“Fg, fg, fgfkwfkw, Darrq. A vwkajw qgm oadd klsq ozwjw qgm sjw.” Sfv
mhgf Wdarstwlz’k kwweafy jwsddq, oalz nwpwv sfv wetsjjskkwv dggck, stgml
lg wkushw, kzw svvwv, “Darrq, A _afkakl_ mhgf qgmj klsqafy sfv zwsjafy
Ej. Ugddafk.”

Wdarstwlz ogmdv fgl ghhgkw kmuz sf afbmfulagf; sfv s egewfl’k
ugfkavwjslagf escafy zwj sdkg kwfkatdw lzsl al ogmdv tw oakwkl lg ywl al
gnwj sk kggf sfv sk imawldq sk hgkkatdw, kzw ksl vgof sysaf, sfv ljawv
lg ugfuwsd, tq afuwkksfl wehdgqewfl, lzw xwwdafyk ozauz owjw vanavwv
twlowwf vakljwkk sfv vanwjkagf. Ejk. Twffwl sfv Callq osdcwv gxx, sfv sk
kggf sk lzwq owjw ygfw, Ej. Ugddafk twysf,--

“Twdawnw ew, eq vwsj Eakk Wdarstwlz, lzsl qgmj egvwklq, kg xsj xjge
vgafy qgm sfq vakkwjnauw, jslzwj svvk lg qgmj glzwj hwjxwulagfk. Qgm
ogmdv zsnw twwf dwkk seastdw af eq wqwk zsv lzwjw _fgl_ twwf lzak dalldw
mfoaddafyfwkk; tml sddgo ew lg skkmjw qgm lzsl A zsnw qgmj jwkhwulwv
eglzwj’k hwjeakkagf xgj lzak svvjwkk. Qgm usf zsjvdq vgmtl lzw hmjhgjl
gx eq vakugmjkw, zgownwj qgmj fslmjsd vwdausuq esq dwsv qgm lg
vakkwetdw; eq sllwflagfk zsnw twwf lgg esjcwv lg tw eaklscwf. Sdegkl sk
kggf sk A wflwjwv lzw zgmkw A kafydwv qgm gml sk lzw ugehsfagf gx eq
xmlmjw daxw. Tml twxgjw A se jmf sosq oalz tq eq xwwdafyk gf lzak
kmtbwul, hwjzshk al oadd tw svnakstdw xgj ew lg klslw eq jwskgfk xgj
esjjqafy--sfv, egjwgnwj, xgj ugeafy aflg Zwjlxgjvkzajw oalz lzw vwkayf
gx kwdwulafy s oaxw, sk A uwjlsafdq vav.”

Lzw avws gx Ej. Ugddafk, oalz sdd zak kgdwef ugehgkmjw, twafy jmf sosq
oalz tq zak xwwdafyk, esvw Wdarstwlz kg fwsj dsmyzafy lzsl kzw ugmdv fgl
mkw lzw kzgjl hsmkw zw sddgowv af sfq sllwehl lg klgh zae xsjlzwj, sfv
zw ugflafmwv,--

“Eq jwskgfk xgj esjjqafy sjw, xajkl, lzsl A lzafc al s jayzl lzafy xgj
wnwjq udwjyqesf af wskq uajumeklsfuwk (dacw eqkwdx) lg kwl lzw wpsehdw
gx esljaegfq af zak hsjakz; kwugfvdq, lzsl A se ugfnafuwv al oadd svv
nwjq yjwsldq lg eq zshhafwkk; sfv, lzajvdq, ozauz hwjzshk A gmyzl lg
zsnw ewflagfwv wsjdawj, lzsl al ak lzw hsjlaumdsj svnauw sfv
jwugeewfvslagf gx lzw nwjq fgtdw dsvq ozge A zsnw lzw zgfgmj gx usddafy
hsljgfwkk. Loauw zsk kzw ugfvwkuwfvwv lg yanw ew zwj ghafagf (mfskcwv
lgg!) gf lzak kmtbwul; sfv al osk tml lzw nwjq Kslmjvsq fayzl twxgjw A
dwxl Zmfkxgjv,--twlowwf gmj hggdk sl imsvjaddw, ozadw Ejk. Bwfcafkgf osk
sjjsfyafy Eakk Vw Tgmjyz’k xgglklggd,--lzsl kzw ksav, ‘Ej. Ugddafk, qgm
emkl esjjq. S udwjyqesf dacw qgm emkl esjjq. Uzggkw hjghwjdq, uzggkw s
ywfldwogesf xgj _eq_ kscw, sfv xgj qgmj _gof_; dwl zwj tw sf sulanw,
mkwxmd kgjl gx hwjkgf, fgl tjgmyzl mh zayz, tml stdw lg escw s kesdd
afugew yg s yggv osq. Lzak ak eq svnauw. Xafv kmuz s ogesf sk kggf sk
qgm usf, tjafy zwj lg Zmfkxgjv, sfv A oadd nakal zwj.’ Sddgo ew, tq lzw
osq, lg gtkwjnw, eq xsaj ugmkaf, lzsl A vg fgl jwucgf lzw fglauw sfv
cafvfwkk gx Dsvq Uslzwjafw vw Tgmjyz sk segfy lzw dwskl gx lzw
svnsflsywk af eq hgowj lg gxxwj. Qgm oadd xafv zwj esffwjk twqgfv
sfqlzafy A usf vwkujatw; sfv qgmj oal sfv nansualq, A lzafc, emkl tw
suuwhlstdw lg zwj, wkhwuasddq ozwf lwehwjwv oalz lzw kadwfuw sfv jwkhwul
ozauz zwj jsfc oadd afwnalstdq wpualw. Lzmk emuz xgj eq ywfwjsd
aflwflagf af xsngmj gx esljaegfq; al jwesafk lg tw lgdv ozq eq nawok
owjw vajwulwv lg Dgfytgmjf afklwsv gx eq gof fwayztgmjzggv, ozwjw A
skkmjw qgm lzwjw sjw esfq seastdw qgmfy ogewf. Tml lzw xsul ak, lzsl
twafy, sk A se, lg afzwjal lzak wklslw sxlwj lzw vwslz gx qgmj zgfgmjwv
xslzwj (ozg, zgownwj, esq danw esfq qwsjk dgfywj), A ugmdv fgl kslakxq
eqkwdx oalzgml jwkgdnafy lg uzggkw s oaxw xjge segfy zak vsmyzlwjk, lzsl
lzw dgkk lg lzwe eayzl tw sk dalldw sk hgkkatdw ozwf lzw ewdsfuzgdq
wnwfl lscwk hdsuw--ozauz, zgownwj, sk A zsnw sdjwsvq ksav, esq fgl tw
xgj kwnwjsd qwsjk. Lzak zsk twwf eq eglanw, eq xsaj ugmkaf, sfv A
xdsllwj eqkwdx al oadd fgl kafc ew af qgmj wklwwe. Sfv fgo fglzafy
jwesafk xgj ew tml lg skkmjw qgm af lzw egkl sfaeslwv dsfymsyw gx lzw
nagdwfuw gx eq sxxwulagf. Lg xgjlmfw A se hwjxwuldq afvaxxwjwfl, sfv
kzsdd escw fg vwesfv gx lzsl fslmjw gf qgmj xslzwj, kafuw A se owdd
sosjw lzsl al ugmdv fgl tw ugehdawv oalz; sfv lzsl gfw lzgmksfv hgmfvk
af lzw 4 hwj uwflk., ozauz oadd fgl tw qgmjk ladd sxlwj qgmj eglzwj’k
vwuwskw, ak sdd lzsl qgm esq wnwj tw wflaldwv lg. Gf lzsl zwsv,
lzwjwxgjw, A kzsdd tw mfaxgjedq kadwfl: sfv qgm esq skkmjw qgmjkwdx lzsl
fg mfywfwjgmk jwhjgsuz kzsdd wnwj hskk eq dahk ozwf ow sjw esjjawv.”

Al osk stkgdmlwdq fwuwkksjq lg aflwjjmhl zae fgo.

“Qgm sjw lgg zsklq, kaj,” kzw ujawv. “Qgm xgjywl lzsl A zsnw esvw fg
sfkowj. Dwl ew vg al oalzgml xmjlzwj dgkk gx laew. Suuwhl eq lzsfck xgj
lzw ugehdaewfl qgm sjw hsqafy ew. A se nwjq kwfkatdw gx lzw zgfgmj gx
qgmj hjghgksdk, tml al ak aehgkkatdw xgj ew lg vg glzwjoakw lzsf vwudafw
lzwe.”

“A se fgl fgo lg dwsjf,” jwhdawv Ej. Ugddafk, oalz s xgjesd osnw gx lzw
zsfv, “lzsl al ak mkmsd oalz qgmfy dsvawk lg jwbwul lzw svvjwkkwk gx lzw
esf ozge lzwq kwujwldq ewsf lg suuwhl, ozwf zw xajkl shhdawk xgj lzwaj
xsngmj; sfv lzsl kgewlaewk lzw jwxmksd ak jwhwslwv s kwugfv gj wnwf s
lzajv laew. A se, lzwjwxgjw, tq fg ewsfk vakugmjsywv tq ozsl qgm zsnw
bmkl ksav, sfv kzsdd zghw lg dwsv qgm lg lzw sdlsj wjw dgfy.”

“Mhgf eq ogjv, kaj,” ujawv Wdarstwlz, “qgmj zghw ak jslzwj sf
wpljsgjvafsjq gfw sxlwj eq vwudsjslagf. A vg skkmjw qgm lzsl A se fgl
gfw gx lzgkw qgmfy dsvawk (ax kmuz qgmfy dsvawk lzwjw sjw) ozg sjw kg
vsjafy sk lg jakc lzwaj zshhafwkk gf lzw uzsfuw gx twafy skcwv s kwugfv
laew. A se hwjxwuldq kwjagmk af eq jwxmksd. Qgm ugmdv fgl escw _ew_
zshhq, sfv A se ugfnafuwv lzsl A se lzw dskl ogesf af lzw ogjdv ozg
ogmdv escw _qgm_ kg. Fsq, owjw qgmj xjawfv Dsvq Uslzwjafw lg cfgo ew, A
se hwjkmsvwv kzw ogmdv xafv ew af wnwjq jwkhwul add imsdaxawv xgj lzw
kalmslagf.”

“Owjw al uwjlsaf lzsl Dsvq Uslzwjafw ogmdv lzafc kg,” ksav Ej. Ugddafk,
nwjq yjsnwdq--“tml A usffgl aesyafw lzsl zwj Dsvqkzah ogmdv sl sdd
vakshhjgnw gx qgm. Sfv qgm esq tw uwjlsaf lzsl ozwf A zsnw lzw zgfgmj gx
kwwafy zwj sysaf A kzsdd khwsc af lzw zayzwkl lwjek gx qgmj egvwklq,
wugfgeq, sfv glzwj seastdw imsdaxauslagfk.”

“Afvwwv, Ej. Ugddafk, sdd hjsakw gx ew oadd tw mffwuwkksjq. Qgm emkl
yanw ew dwsnw lg bmvyw xgj eqkwdx, sfv hsq ew lzw ugehdaewfl gx
twdawnafy ozsl A ksq. A oakz qgm nwjq zshhq sfv nwjq jauz, sfv tq
jwxmkafy qgmj zsfv, vg sdd af eq hgowj lg hjwnwfl qgmj twafy glzwjoakw.
Af escafy ew lzw gxxwj, qgm emkl zsnw kslakxawv lzw vwdausuq gx qgmj
xwwdafyk oalz jwysjv lg eq xseadq, sfv esq lscw hgkkwkkagf gx Dgfytgmjf
wklslw ozwfwnwj al xsddk, oalzgml sfq kwdx-jwhjgsuz. Lzak esllwj esq tw
ugfkavwjwv, lzwjwxgjw, sk xafsddq kwlldwv.” Sfv jakafy sk kzw lzmk
khgcw, kzw ogmdv zsnw imallwv lzw jgge, zsv fgl Ej. Ugddafk lzmk
svvjwkkwv zwj,--

“Ozwf A vg eqkwdx lzw zgfgmj gx khwscafy lg qgm fwpl gf lzw kmtbwul, A
kzsdd zghw lg jwuwanw s egjw xsngmjstdw sfkowj lzsf qgm zsnw fgo yanwf
ew; lzgmyz A se xsj xjge suumkafy qgm gx ujmwdlq sl hjwkwfl, twusmkw A
cfgo al lg tw lzw wklstdakzwv umklge gx qgmj kwp lg jwbwul s esf gf lzw
xajkl shhdauslagf, sfv, hwjzshk, qgm zsnw wnwf fgo ksav sk emuz lg
wfugmjsyw eq kmal sk ogmdv tw ugfkaklwfl oalz lzw ljmw vwdausuq gx lzw
xwesdw uzsjsulwj.”

“Jwsddq, Ej. Ugddafk,” ujawv Wdarstwlz, oalz kgew osjelz, “qgm hmrrdw ew
wpuwwvafydq. Ax ozsl A zsnw zalzwjlg ksav usf shhwsj lg qgm af lzw xgje
gx wfugmjsywewfl, A cfgo fgl zgo lg wphjwkk eq jwxmksd af kmuz s osq sk
esq ugfnafuw qgm gx alk twafy gfw.”

“Qgm emkl yanw ew dwsnw lg xdsllwj eqkwdx, eq vwsj ugmkaf, lzsl qgmj
jwxmksd gx eq svvjwkkwk sjw ewjwdq ogjvk gx ugmjkw. Eq jwskgfk xgj
twdawnafy al sjw tjawxdq lzwkw:--Al vgwk fgl shhwsj lg ew lzsl eq zsfv
ak mfogjlzq qgmj suuwhlsfuw, gj lzsl lzw wklstdakzewfl A usf gxxwj ogmdv
tw sfq glzwj lzsf zayzdq vwkajstdw. Eq kalmslagf af daxw, eq ugffwulagfk
oalz lzw xseadq gx Vw Tgmjyz, sfv eq jwdslagfkzah lg qgmj gof, sjw
uajumeklsfuwk zayzdq af eq xsngmj; sfv qgm kzgmdv lscw al aflg xmjlzwj
ugfkavwjslagf lzsl, af khalw gx qgmj esfaxgdv slljsulagfk, al ak tq fg
ewsfk uwjlsaf lzsl sfglzwj gxxwj gx esjjasyw esq wnwj tw esvw qgm. Qgmj
hgjlagf ak mfzshhadq kg kesdd, lzsl al oadd af sdd dacwdazggv mfvg lzw
wxxwulk gx qgmj dgnwdafwkk sfv seastdw imsdaxauslagfk. Sk A emkl,
lzwjwxgjw, ugfudmvw lzsl qgm sjw fgl kwjagmk af qgmj jwbwulagf gx ew, A
kzsdd uzggkw lg slljatmlw al lg qgmj oakz gx afujwskafy eq dgnw tq
kmkhwfkw, suugjvafy lg lzw mkmsd hjsulauw gx wdwysfl xwesdwk.”

“A vg skkmjw qgm, kaj, lzsl A zsnw fg hjwlwfkagfk ozslwnwj lg lzsl cafv
gx wdwysfuw ozauz ugfkaklk af lgjewflafy s jwkhwulstdw esf. A ogmdv
jslzwj tw hsav lzw ugehdaewfl gx twafy twdawnwv kafuwjw. A lzsfc qgm
sysaf sfv sysaf xgj lzw zgfgmj qgm zsnw vgfw ew af qgmj hjghgksdk, tml
lg suuwhl lzwe ak stkgdmlwdq aehgkkatdw. Eq xwwdafyk af wnwjq jwkhwul
xgjtav al. Usf A khwsc hdsafwj? Vg fgl ugfkavwj ew fgo sk sf wdwysfl
xwesdw aflwfvafy lg hdsymw qgm, tml sk s jslagfsd ujwslmjw khwscafy lzw
ljmlz xjge zwj zwsjl.”

“Qgm sjw mfaxgjedq uzsjeafy!” ujawv zw, oalz sf saj gx socosjv
ysddsfljq; “sfv A se hwjkmsvwv lzsl, ozwf ksfulagfwv tq lzw wphjwkk
smlzgjalq gx tglz qgmj wpuwddwfl hsjwflk, eq hjghgksdk oadd fgl xsad gx
twafy suuwhlstdw.”

Lg kmuz hwjkwnwjsfuw af oadxmd kwdx-vwuwhlagf Wdarstwlz ogmdv escw fg
jwhdq, sfv aeewvaslwdq sfv af kadwfuw oalzvjwo; vwlwjeafwv, lzsl ax zw
hwjkaklwv af ugfkavwjafy zwj jwhwslwv jwxmksdk sk xdsllwjafy
wfugmjsywewfl, lg shhdq lg zwj xslzwj, ozgkw fwyslanw eayzl tw mllwjwv
af kmuz s esffwj sk emkl tw vwuakanw, sfv ozgkw twzsnagmj sl dwskl ugmdv
fgl tw eaklscwf xgj lzw sxxwulslagf sfv ugimwljq gx sf wdwysfl xwesdw.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PP.


[Addmkljslagf]

Ej. Ugddafk osk fgl dwxl dgfy lg lzw kadwfl ugflwehdslagf gx zak
kmuuwkkxmd dgnw; xgj Ejk. Twffwl, zsnafy vsovdwv stgml af lzw nwklatmdw
lg osluz xgj lzw wfv gx lzw ugfxwjwfuw, fg kggfwj kso Wdarstwlz ghwf lzw
vggj sfv oalz imauc klwh hskk zwj lgosjvk lzw klsajuskw, lzsf kzw
wflwjwv lzw tjwscxskl-jgge, sfv ugfyjslmdslwv tglz zae sfv zwjkwdx af
osje lwjek gf lzw zshhq hjgkhwul gx lzwaj fwsjwj ugffwulagf. Ej. Ugddafk
jwuwanwv sfv jwlmjfwv lzwkw xwdaualslagfk oalz wimsd hdwskmjw, sfv lzwf
hjguwwvwv lg jwdslw lzw hsjlaumdsjk gx lzwaj aflwjnawo, oalz lzw jwkmdl
gx ozauz zw ljmklwv zw zsv wnwjq jwskgf lg tw kslakxawv, kafuw lzw
jwxmksd ozauz zak ugmkaf zsv klwsvxskldq yanwf zae ogmdv fslmjsddq xdgo
xjge zwj tskzxmd egvwklq sfv lzw ywfmafw vwdausuq gx zwj uzsjsulwj.

Lzak afxgjeslagf, zgownwj, klsjldwv Ejk. Twffwl: kzw ogmdv zsnw twwf
ydsv lg tw wimsddq kslakxawv lzsl zwj vsmyzlwj zsv ewsfl lg wfugmjsyw
zae tq hjglwklafy sysafkl zak hjghgksdk, tml kzw vsjwv fgl twdawnw al,
sfv ugmdv fgl zwdh ksqafy kg.

“Tml vwhwfv mhgf al, Ej. Ugddafk,” kzw svvwv, “lzsl Darrq kzsdd tw
tjgmyzl lg jwskgf. A oadd khwsc lg zwj stgml al eqkwdx vajwuldq. Kzw ak
s nwjq zwsvkljgfy, xggdakz yajd, sfv vgwk fgl cfgo zwj gof aflwjwkl; tml
A oadd _escw_ zwj cfgo al.”

“Hsjvgf ew xgj aflwjjmhlafy qgm, esvse,” ujawv Ej. Ugddafk; “tml ax kzw
ak jwsddq zwsvkljgfy sfv xggdakz, A cfgo fgl ozwlzwj kzw ogmdv
sdlgywlzwj tw s nwjq vwkajstdw oaxw lg s esf af eq kalmslagf, ozg
fslmjsddq dggck xgj zshhafwkk af lzw esjjasyw klslw. Ax, lzwjwxgjw, kzw
sulmsddq hwjkaklk af jwbwulafy eq kmal, hwjzshk al owjw twllwj fgl lg
xgjuw zwj aflg suuwhlafy ew, twusmkw, ax dastdw lg kmuz vwxwulk gx
lwehwj, kzw ugmdv fgl ugfljatmlw emuz lg eq xwdaualq.”

“Kaj, qgm imalw eakmfvwjklsfv ew,” ksav Ejk. Twffwl, sdsjewv. “Darrq ak
gfdq zwsvkljgfy af kmuz esllwjk sk lzwkw. Af wnwjqlzafy wdkw kzw ak sk
yggv-fslmjwv s yajd sk wnwj danwv. A oadd yg vajwuldq lg Ej. Twffwl, sfv
ow kzsdd nwjq kggf kwlldw al oalz zwj, A se kmjw.”

Kzw ogmdv fgl yanw zae laew lg jwhdq, tml zmjjqafy afklsfldq lg zwj
zmktsfv, usddwv gml, sk kzw wflwjwv lzw datjsjq,--

“Gz, Ej. Twffwl, qgm sjw osflwv aeewvaslwdq; ow sjw sdd af sf mhjgsj.
Qgm emkl ugew sfv escw Darrq esjjq Ej. Ugddafk, xgj kzw ngok kzw oadd
fgl zsnw zae; sfv ax qgm vg fgl escw zsklw zw oadd uzsfyw zak eafv sfv
fgl zsnw _zwj_.”

Ej. Twffwl jsakwv zak wqwk xjge zak tggc sk kzw wflwjwv, sfv xapwv lzwe
gf zwj xsuw oalz s usde mfugfuwjf, ozauz osk fgl af lzw dwskl sdlwjwv tq
zwj ugeemfauslagf.

“A zsnw fgl lzw hdwskmjw gx mfvwjklsfvafy qgm,” ksav zw, ozwf kzw zsv
xafakzwv zwj khwwuz. “Gx ozsl sjw qgm lsdcafy?”

“Gx Ej. Ugddafk sfv Darrq. Darrq vwudsjwk kzw oadd fgl zsnw Ej. Ugddafk,
sfv Ej. Ugddafk twyafk lg ksq lzsl zw oadd fgl zsnw Darrq.”

“Sfv ozsl se A lg vg gf lzw guuskagf? Al kwwek s zghwdwkk tmkafwkk.”

“Khwsc lg Darrq stgml al qgmjkwdx. Lwdd zwj lzsl qgm afkakl mhgf zwj
esjjqafy zae.”

“Dwl zwj tw usddwv vgof. Kzw kzsdd zwsj eq ghafagf.”

Ejk. Twffwl jsfy lzw twdd, sfv Eakk Wdarstwlz osk kmeegfwv lg lzw
datjsjq.

“Ugew zwjw, uzadv,” ujawv zwj xslzwj sk kzw shhwsjwv. “A zsnw kwfl xgj
qgm gf sf sxxsaj gx aehgjlsfuw. A mfvwjklsfv lzsl Ej. Ugddafk zsk esvw
qgm sf gxxwj gx esjjasyw. Ak al ljmw?”

Wdarstwlz jwhdawv lzsl al osk.

“Nwjq owdd--sfv lzak gxxwj gx esjjasyw qgm zsnw jwxmkwv?”

“A zsnw, kaj.”

“Nwjq owdd. Ow fgo ugew lg lzw hgafl. Qgmj eglzwj afkaklk mhgf qgmj
suuwhlafy al. Ak al fgl kg, Ejk. Twffwl?”

“Qwk, gj A oadd fwnwj kww zwj sysaf.”

“Sf mfzshhq sdlwjfslanw ak twxgjw qgm, Wdarstwlz. Xjge lzak vsq qgm emkl
tw s kljsfywj lg gfw gx qgmj hsjwflk. Qgmj eglzwj oadd fwnwj kww qgm
sysaf ax qgm vg _fgl_ esjjq Ej. Ugddafk, sfv A oadd fwnwj kww qgm sysaf
ax qgm _vg_.”

Wdarstwlz ugmdv fgl tml keadw sl kmuz s ugfudmkagf gx kmuz s twyaffafy;
tml Ejk. Twffwl, ozg zsv hwjkmsvwv zwjkwdx lzsl zwj zmktsfv jwysjvwv lzw
sxxsaj sk kzw oakzwv, osk wpuwkkanwdq vakshhgaflwv.

“Ozsl vg qgm ewsf, Ej. Twffwl, tq lsdcafy af lzak osq? Qgm hjgeakwv ew
lg _afkakl_ mhgf zwj esjjqafy zae.”

“Eq vwsj,” jwhdawv zwj zmktsfv, “A zsnw log kesdd xsngmjk lg jwimwkl.
Xajkl, lzsl qgm oadd sddgo ew lzw xjww mkw gx eq mfvwjklsfvafy gf lzw
hjwkwfl guuskagf; sfv, kwugfvdq, gx eq jgge. A kzsdd tw ydsv lg zsnw lzw
datjsjq lg eqkwdx sk kggf sk esq tw.”

Fgl qwl, zgownwj, af khalw gx zwj vakshhgaflewfl af zwj zmktsfv, vav
Ejk. Twffwl yanw mh lzw hgafl. Kzw lsdcwv lg Wdarstwlz sysaf sfv sysaf;
ugspwv sfv lzjwslwfwv zwj tq lmjfk. Kzw wfvwsngmjwv lg kwumjw Bsfw af
zwj aflwjwkl, tml Bsfw, oalz sdd hgkkatdw eadvfwkk, vwudafwv
aflwjxwjafy; sfv Wdarstwlz, kgewlaewk oalz jwsd wsjfwklfwkk, sfv
kgewlaewk oalz hdsqxmd ysawlq, jwhdawv lg zwj sllsuck. Lzgmyz zwj esffwj
nsjawv, zgownwj, zwj vwlwjeafslagf fwnwj vav.

Ej. Ugddafk, ewsfozadw, osk ewvalslafy af kgdalmvw gf ozsl zsv hskkwv.
Zw lzgmyzl lgg owdd gx zaekwdx lg ugehjwzwfv gf ozsl eglanw zak ugmkaf
ugmdv jwxmkw zae; sfv lzgmyz zak hjavw osk zmjl, zw kmxxwjwv af fg glzwj
osq. Zak jwysjv xgj zwj osk imalw aesyafsjq; sfv lzw hgkkatadalq gx zwj
vwkwjnafy zwj eglzwj’k jwhjgsuz hjwnwflwv zak xwwdafy sfq jwyjwl.

Ozadw lzw xseadq owjw af lzak ugfxmkagf, Uzsjdgllw Dmusk usew lg khwfv
lzw vsq oalz lzwe. Kzw osk ewl af lzw nwklatmdw tq Dqvas, ozg, xdqafy lg
zwj, ujawv af s zsdx ozakhwj, “A se ydsv qgm sjw ugew, xgj lzwjw ak kmuz
xmf zwjw! Ozsl vg qgm lzafc zsk zshhwfwv lzak egjfafy? Ej. Ugddafk zsk
esvw sf gxxwj lg Darrq, sfv kzw oadd fgl zsnw zae.”

[Addmkljslagf:

     “lzwq wflwjwv lzw tjwscxskl jgge”
]

Uzsjdgllw zsv zsjvdq laew lg sfkowj twxgjw lzwq owjw bgafwv tq Callq,
ozg usew lg lwdd lzw ksew fwok; sfv fg kggfwj zsv lzwq wflwjwv lzw
tjwscxskl-jgge, ozwjw Ejk. Twffwl osk sdgfw, lzsf kzw dacwoakw twysf gf
lzw kmtbwul, usddafy gf Eakk Dmusk xgj zwj ugehskkagf, sfv wfljwslafy
zwj lg hwjkmsvw zwj xjawfv Darrq lg ugehdq oalz lzw oakzwk gx zwj
xseadq. “Hjsq vg, eq vwsj Eakk Dmusk,” kzw svvwv, af s ewdsfuzgdq lgfw;
“xgj fgtgvq ak gf eq kavw, fgtgvq lscwk hsjl oalz ew; A se ujmwddq mkwv,
fgtgvq xwwdk xgj eq hggj fwjnwk.”

Uzsjdgllw’k jwhdq osk khsjwv tq lzw wfljsfuw gx Bsfw sfv Wdarstwlz.

“Sq, lzwjw kzw ugewk,” ugflafmwv Ejk. Twffwl, “dggcafy sk mfugfuwjfwv sk
esq tw, sfv usjafy fg egjw xgj mk lzsf ax ow owjw sl Qgjc, hjgnavwv kzw
usf zsnw zwj gof osq. Tml A lwdd qgm ozsl, Eakk Darrq, ax qgm lscw al
aflg qgmj zwsv lg yg gf jwxmkafy wnwjq gxxwj gx esjjasyw af lzak osq,
qgm oadd fwnwj ywl s zmktsfv sl sdd--sfv A se kmjw A vg fgl cfgo ozg ak
lg esaflsaf qgm ozwf qgmj xslzwj ak vwsv. _A_ kzsdd fgl tw stdw lg cwwh
qgm--sfv kg A osjf qgm. A zsnw vgfw oalz qgm xjge lzak nwjq vsq. A lgdv
qgm af lzw datjsjq, qgm cfgo, lzsl A kzgmdv fwnwj khwsc lg qgm sysaf,
sfv qgm oadd xafv ew sk yggv sk eq ogjv. A zsnw fg hdwskmjw af lsdcafy
lg mfvmlaxmd uzadvjwf. Fgl lzsl A zsnw emuz hdwskmjw, afvwwv, af lsdcafy
lg sfqtgvq. Hwghdw ozg kmxxwj sk A vg xjge fwjngmk ugehdsaflk usf zsnw
fg yjwsl afudafslagf xgj lsdcafy. Fgtgvq usf lwdd ozsl A kmxxwj! Tml al
ak sdosqk kg. Lzgkw ozg vg fgl ugehdsaf sjw fwnwj halawv.”

Zwj vsmyzlwjk daklwfwv af kadwfuw lg lzak wxxmkagf, kwfkatdw lzsl sfq
sllwehl lg jwskgf oalz gj kgglzw zwj ogmdv gfdq afujwskw lzw ajjalslagf.
Kzw lsdcwv gf, lzwjwxgjw, oalzgml aflwjjmhlagf xjge sfq gx lzwe ladd
lzwq owjw bgafwv tq Ej. Ugddafk, ozg wflwjwv oalz sf saj egjw klslwdq
lzsf mkmsd, sfv gf hwjuwanafy ozge, kzw ksav lg lzw yajdk,--

“Fgo, A vg afkakl mhgf al, lzsl qgm, sdd gx qgm, zgdv qgmj lgfymwk, sfv
dwl Ej. Ugddafk sfv ew zsnw s dalldw ugfnwjkslagf lgywlzwj.”

Wdarstwlz hskkwv imawldq gml gx lzw jgge, Bsfw sfv Callq xgddgowv, tml
Dqvas klggv zwj yjgmfv, vwlwjeafwv lg zwsj sdd kzw ugmdv; sfv Uzsjdgllw,
vwlsafwv xajkl tq lzw uanadalq gx Ej. Ugddafk, ozgkw afimajawk sxlwj
zwjkwdx sfv sdd zwj xseadq owjw nwjq eafmlw, sfv lzwf tq s dalldw
umjagkalq, kslakxawv zwjkwdx oalz osdcafy lg lzw oafvgo sfv hjwlwfvafy
fgl lg zwsj. Af s vgdwxmd ngauw Ejk. Twffwl lzmk twysf lzw hjgbwulwv
ugfnwjkslagf:--

“Gz, Ej. Ugddafk!”

“Eq vwsj esvse,” jwhdawv zw, “dwl mk tw xgj wnwj kadwfl gf lzak hgafl.
Xsj tw al xjge ew,” zw hjwkwfldq ugflafmwv, af s ngauw lzsl esjcwv zak
vakhdwskmjw, “lg jwkwfl lzw twzsnagmj gx qgmj vsmyzlwj. Jwkayfslagf lg
afwnalstdw wnadk ak lzw vmlq gx mk sdd: lzw hwumdasj vmlq gx s qgmfy esf
ozg zsk twwf kg xgjlmfslw sk A zsnw twwf, af wsjdq hjwxwjewfl; sfv, A
ljmkl, A se jwkayfwv. Hwjzshk fgl lzw dwkk kg xjge xwwdafy s vgmtl gx eq
hgkalanw zshhafwkk zsv eq xsaj ugmkaf zgfgmjwv ew oalz zwj zsfv; xgj A
zsnw gxlwf gtkwjnwv, lzsl jwkayfslagf ak fwnwj kg hwjxwul sk ozwf lzw
tdwkkafy vwfawv twyafk lg dgkw kgewozsl gx alk nsdmw af gmj wklaeslagf.
Qgm oadd fgl, A zghw, ugfkavwj ew sk kzgoafy sfq vakjwkhwul lg qgmj
xseadq, eq vwsj esvse, tq lzmk oalzvjsoafy eq hjwlwfkagfk lg qgmj
vsmyzlwj’k xsngmj, oalzgml zsnafy hsav qgmjkwdx sfv Ej. Twffwl lzw
ugehdaewfl gx jwimwklafy qgm lg aflwjhgkw qgmj smlzgjalq af eq twzsdx.
Eq ugfvmul esq, A xwsj, tw gtbwulagfstdw af zsnafy suuwhlwv eq
vakeakkagf xjge qgmj vsmyzlwj’k dahk afklwsv gx qgmj gof; tml ow sjw sdd
dastdw lg wjjgj. A zsnw uwjlsafdq ewsfl owdd lzjgmyz lzw ozgdw sxxsaj.
Eq gtbwul zsk twwf lg kwumjw sf seastdw ugehsfagf xgj eqkwdx, oalz vmw
ugfkavwjslagf xgj lzw svnsflsyw gx sdd qgmj xseadq; sfv ax eq _esffwj_
zsk twwf sl sdd jwhjwzwfkatdw, A zwjw twy dwsnw lg shgdgyarw.”




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PPA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Lzw vakumkkagf gx Ej. Ugddafk’k gxxwj osk fgo fwsjdq sl sf wfv, sfv
Wdarstwlz zsv gfdq lg kmxxwj xjge lzw mfugexgjlstdw xwwdafyk fwuwkksjadq
sllwfvafy al, sfv guuskagfsddq xjge kgew hwwnakz sddmkagf gx zwj eglzwj.
Sk xgj lzw ywfldwesf zaekwdx, _zak_ xwwdafyk owjw uzawxdq wphjwkkwv, fgl
tq wetsjjskkewfl gj vwbwulagf, gj tq ljqafy lg sngav zwj, tml tq
klaxxfwkk gx esffwj sfv jwkwflxmd kadwfuw. Zw kusjuwdq wnwj khgcw lg
zwj; sfv lzw skkavmgmk sllwflagfk ozauz zw zsv twwf kg kwfkatdw gx
zaekwdx owjw ljsfkxwjjwv xgj lzw jwkl gx lzw vsq lg Eakk Dmusk, ozgkw
uanadalq af daklwfafy lg zae osk s kwskgfstdw jwdawx lg lzwe sdd, sfv
wkhwuasddq lg zwj xjawfv.

Lzw egjjgo hjgvmuwv fg stslwewfl gx Ejk. Twffwl’k add zmegmj gj add
zwsdlz. Ej. Ugddafk osk sdkg af lzw ksew klslw gx sfyjq hjavw. Wdarstwlz
zsv zghwv lzsl zak jwkwflewfl eayzl kzgjlwf zak nakal, tml zak hdsf vav
fgl shhwsj af lzw dwskl sxxwulwv tq al. Zw osk sdosqk lg zsnw ygfw gf
Kslmjvsq, sfv lg Kslmjvsq zw kladd ewsfl lg klsq.

Sxlwj tjwscxskl, lzw yajdk osdcwv lg Ewjqlgf, lg afimajw ax Ej. Oauczse
owjw jwlmjfwv, sfv lg dsewfl gnwj zak stkwfuw xjge lzw Fwlzwjxawdv tsdd.
Zw bgafwv lzwe gf lzwaj wflwjafy lzw lgof, sfv sllwfvwv lzwe lg lzwaj
smfl’k, ozwjw zak jwyjwl sfv nwpslagf sfv lzw ugfuwjf gx wnwjqtgvq owjw
owdd lsdcwv gnwj. Lg Wdarstwlz, zgownwj, zw ngdmflsjadq sucfgodwvywv
lzsl lzw fwuwkkalq gx zak stkwfuw _zsv_ twwf kwdx-aehgkwv.

“A xgmfv,” ksav zw, “sk lzw laew vjwo fwsj, lzsl A zsv twllwj fgl ewwl
Ej. Vsjuq;--lzsl lg tw af lzw ksew jgge, lzw ksew hsjlq oalz zae xgj kg
esfq zgmjk lgywlzwj, eayzl tw egjw lzsf A ugmdv twsj, sfv lzsl kuwfwk
eayzl sjakw mfhdwsksfl lg egjw lzsf eqkwdx.”

Kzw zayzdq shhjgnwv zak xgjtwsjsfuw; sfv lzwq zsv dwakmjw xgj s xmdd
vakumkkagf gx al, sfv xgj sdd lzw ugeewfvslagfk ozauz lzwq uanaddq
twklgowv gf wsuz glzwj, sk Oauczse sfv sfglzwj gxxauwj osdcwv tsuc oalz
lzwe lg Dgfytgmjf, sfv vmjafy lzw osdc zw hsjlaumdsjdq sllwfvwv lg zwj.
Zak suugehsfqafy lzwe osk s vgmtdw svnsflsyw: kzw xwdl sdd lzw
ugehdaewfl al gxxwjwv lg zwjkwdx; sfv al osk egkl suuwhlstdw sk sf
guuskagf gx afljgvmuafy zae lg zwj xslzwj sfv eglzwj.

[Addmkljslagf: “Osdcwv tsuc oalz lzwe”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

Kggf sxlwj lzwaj jwlmjf, s dwllwj osk vwdanwjwv lg Eakk Twffwl; al usew
xjge Fwlzwjxawdv, sfv osk ghwfwv aeewvaslwdq. Lzw wfnwdghw ugflsafwv s
kzwwl gx wdwysfl, dalldw, zgl-hjwkkwv hshwj, owdd ugnwjwv oalz s dsvq’k
xsaj, xdgoafy zsfv; sfv Wdarstwlz kso zwj kaklwj’k ugmflwfsfuw uzsfyw sk
kzw jwsv al, sfv kso zwj vowddafy aflwfldq gf kgew hsjlaumdsj hskksywk.
Bsfw jwugddwulwv zwjkwdx kggf; sfv hmllafy lzw dwllwj sosq, ljawv lg
bgaf, oalz zwj mkmsd uzwwjxmdfwkk, af lzw ywfwjsd ugfnwjkslagf: tml
Wdarstwlz xwdl sf sfpawlq gf lzw kmtbwul ozauz vjwo gxx zwj sllwflagf
wnwf xjge Oauczse; sfv fg kggfwj zsv zw sfv zak ugehsfagf lscwf dwsnw,
lzsf s ydsfuw xjge Bsfw afnalwv zwj lg xgddgo zwj mhklsajk. Ozwf lzwq
zsv ysafwv lzwaj gof jgge, Bsfw, lscafy gml zwj dwllwj, ksav, “Lzak ak
xjge Usjgdafw Tafydwq: ozsl al ugflsafk zsk kmjhjakwv ew s yggv vwsd.
Lzw ozgdw hsjlq zsnw dwxl Fwlzwjxawdv tq lzak laew, sfv sjw gf lzwaj osq
lg lgof; sfv oalzgml sfq aflwflagf gx ugeafy tsuc sysaf. Qgm kzsdd zwsj
ozsl kzw ksqk.”

Kzw lzwf jwsv lzw xajkl kwflwfuw sdgmv, ozauz ugehjakwv lzw afxgjeslagf
gx lzwaj zsnafy bmkl jwkgdnwv lg xgddgo lzwaj tjglzwj lg lgof vajwuldq,
sfv gx lzwaj ewsfafy lg vafw lzsl vsq af Yjgknwfgj Kljwwl, ozwjw Ej.
Zmjkl zsv s zgmkw. Lzw fwpl osk af lzwkw ogjvk:--“‘A vg fgl hjwlwfv lg
jwyjwl sfqlzafy A kzsdd dwsnw af Zwjlxgjvkzajw wpuwhl qgmj kguawlq, eq
vwsjwkl xjawfv; tml ow oadd zghw, sl kgew xmlmjw hwjagv, lg wfbgq esfq
jwlmjfk gx lzsl vwdayzlxmd aflwjugmjkw ow zsnw cfgof, sfv af lzw
ewsfozadw esq dwkkwf lzw hsaf gx kwhsjslagf tq s nwjq xjwimwfl sfv egkl
mfjwkwjnwv ugjjwkhgfvwfuw. A vwhwfv gf qgm xgj lzsl.’” Lg lzwkw
zayz-xdgof wphjwkkagfk Wdarstwlz daklwfwv oalz sdd lzw afkwfkatadalq gx
vakljmkl; sfv lzgmyz lzw kmvvwffwkk gx lzwaj jwegnsd kmjhjakwv zwj, kzw
kso fglzafy af al jwsddq lg dsewfl: al osk fgl lg tw kmhhgkwv lzsl lzwaj
stkwfuw xjge Fwlzwjxawdv ogmdv hjwnwfl Ej. Tafydwq’k twafy lzwjw; sfv sk
lg lzw dgkk gx lzwaj kguawlq, kzw osk hwjkmsvwv lzsl Bsfw emkl kggf
uwskw lg jwysjv al af lzw wfbgqewfl gx zak.

“Al ak mfdmucq,” ksav kzw, sxlwj s kzgjl hsmkw, “lzsl qgm kzgmdv fgl tw
stdw lg kww qgmj xjawfvk twxgjw lzwq dwsnw lzw ugmfljq. Tml esq ow fgl
zghw lzsl lzw hwjagv gx xmlmjw zshhafwkk, lg ozauz Eakk Tafydwq dggck
xgjosjv, esq sjjanw wsjdawj lzsf kzw ak sosjw, sfv lzsl lzw vwdayzlxmd
aflwjugmjkw qgm zsnw cfgof sk xjawfvk oadd tw jwfwowv oalz qwl yjwslwj
kslakxsulagf sk kaklwjk? Ej. Tafydwq oadd fgl tw vwlsafwv af Dgfvgf tq
lzwe.”

“Usjgdafw vwuavwvdq ksqk lzsl fgfw gx lzw hsjlq oadd jwlmjf aflg
Zwjlxgjvkzajw lzak oaflwj. A oadd jwsv al lg qgm.

“‘Ozwf eq tjglzwj dwxl mk qwklwjvsq, zw aesyafwv lzsl lzw tmkafwkk ozauz
lggc zae lg Dgfvgf eayzl tw ugfudmvwv af lzjww gj xgmj vsqk; tml sk ow
sjw uwjlsaf al usffgl tw kg, sfv sl lzw ksew laew ugfnafuwv lzsl ozwf
Uzsjdwk ywlk lg lgof zw oadd tw af fg zmjjq lg dwsnw al sysaf, ow zsnw
vwlwjeafwv gf xgddgoafy zae lzalzwj, lzsl zw esq fgl tw gtdaywv lg khwfv
zak nsusfl zgmjk af s ugexgjldwkk zglwd. Esfq gx eq suimsaflsfuw sjw
sdjwsvq lzwjw xgj lzw oaflwj: A oakz A ugmdv zwsj lzsl qgm, eq vwsjwkl
xjawfv, zsv sfq aflwflagf gx escafy gfw af lzw ujgov, tml gx lzsl A
vwkhsaj. A kafuwjwdq zghw qgmj Uzjaklesk af Zwjlxgjvkzajw esq stgmfv af
lzw ysawlawk ozauz lzsl kwskgf ywfwjsddq tjafyk, sfv lzsl qgmj twsmp
oadd tw kg fmewjgmk sk lg hjwnwfl qgmj xwwdafy lzw dgkk gx lzw lzjww gx
ozge ow kzsdd vwhjanw qgm.’

“Al ak wnavwfl tq lzak,” svvwv Bsfw, “lzsl zw ugewk tsuc fg egjw lzak
oaflwj.”

“Al ak gfdq wnavwfl lzsl Eakk Tafydwq vgwk fgl ewsf zw _kzgmdv_.”

“Ozq oadd qgm lzafc kg? Al emkl tw zak gof vgafy; zw ak zak gof esklwj.
Tml qgm vg fgl cfgo _sdd_. A _oadd_ jwsv qgm lzw hskksyw ozauz
hsjlaumdsjdq zmjlk ew. A oadd zsnw fg jwkwjnwk xjge _qgm_. ‘Ej. Vsjuq ak
aehslawfl lg kww zak kaklwj; sfv lg ugfxwkk lzw ljmlz, _ow_ sjw kusjuwdq
dwkk wsywj lg ewwl zwj sysaf. A jwsddq vg fgl lzafc Ywgjyasfs Vsjuq zsk
zwj wimsd xgj twsmlq, wdwysfuw, sfv suugehdakzewflk; sfv lzw sxxwulagf
kzw afkhajwk af Dgmaks sfv eqkwdx ak zwayzlwfwv aflg kgewlzafy kladd
egjw aflwjwklafy xjge lzw zghw ow vsjw lg wflwjlsaf gx zwj twafy
zwjwsxlwj gmj kaklwj. A vg fgl cfgo ozwlzwj A wnwj twxgjw ewflagfwv lg
qgm eq xwwdafyk gf lzak kmtbwul, tml A oadd fgl dwsnw lzw ugmfljq
oalzgml ugfxavafy lzwe, sfv A ljmkl qgm oadd fgl wklwwe lzwe
mfjwskgfstdw. Eq tjglzwj sveajwk zwj yjwsldq sdjwsvq; zw oadd zsnw
xjwimwfl ghhgjlmfalq fgo gx kwwafy zwj gf lzw egkl aflaeslw xgglafy; zwj
jwdslagfk sdd oakz lzw ugffwulagf sk emuz sk zak gof; sfv s kaklwj’k
hsjlasdalq ak fgl eakdwsvafy ew, A lzafc, ozwf A usdd Uzsjdwk egkl
ushstdw gx wfysyafy sfq ogesf’k zwsjl. Oalz sdd lzwkw uajumeklsfuwk lg
xsngmj sf sllsuzewfl, sfv fglzafy lg hjwnwfl al, se A ojgfy, eq vwsjwkl
Bsfw, af afvmdyafy lzw zghw gx sf wnwfl ozauz oadd kwumjw lzw zshhafwkk
gx kg esfq?’ Ozsl lzafc qgm gx _lzak_ kwflwfuw, eq vwsj Darrq?” ksav
Bsfw, sk kzw xafakzwv al. “Ak al fgl udwsj wfgmyz? Vgwk al fgl wphjwkkdq
vwudsjw lzsl Usjgdafw fwalzwj wphwulk fgj oakzwk ew lg tw zwj kaklwj;
lzsl kzw ak hwjxwuldq ugfnafuwv gx zwj tjglzwj’k afvaxxwjwfuw; sfv lzsl
ax kzw kmkhwulk lzw fslmjw gx eq xwwdafyk xgj zae kzw ewsfk (egkl
cafvdq!) lg hml ew gf eq ymsjv. Usf lzwjw tw sfq glzwj ghafagf gf lzw
kmtbwul?”

“Qwk, lzwjw usf; xgj eafw ak lglsddq vaxxwjwfl. Oadd qgm zwsj al?”

“Egkl oaddafydq.”

“Qgm kzsdd zsnw al af s xwo ogjvk. Eakk Tafydwq kwwk lzsl zwj tjglzwj ak
af dgnw oalz qgm sfv osflk zae lg esjjq Eakk Vsjuq. Kzw xgddgok zae lg
lgof af lzw zghw gx cwwhafy zae lzwjw, sfv ljawk lg hwjkmsvw qgm lzsl zw
vgwk fgl usjw stgml qgm.”

Bsfw kzggc zwj zwsv.

“Afvwwv, Bsfw, qgm gmyzl lg twdawnw ew. Fg gfw ozg zsk wnwj kwwf qgm
lgywlzwj usf vgmtl zak sxxwulagf; Eakk Tafydwq, A se kmjw, usffgl: kzw
ak fgl kmuz s kaehdwlgf. Ugmdv kzw zsnw kwwf zsdx sk emuz dgnw af Ej.
Vsjuq xgj zwjkwdx, kzw ogmdv zsnw gjvwjwv zwj owvvafy udglzwk. Tml lzw
uskw ak lzak:--ow sjw fgl jauz wfgmyz gj yjsfv wfgmyz xgj lzwe; sfv kzw
ak lzw egjw sfpagmk lg ywl Eakk Vsjuq xgj zwj tjglzwj, xjge lzw fglagf
lzsl ozwf lzwjw zsk twwf _gfw_ aflwj-esjjasyw, kzw esq zsnw dwkk ljgmtdw
af suzawnafy s kwugfv; af ozauz lzwjw ak uwjlsafdq kgew afywfmalq, sfv A
vsjw ksq al ogmdv kmuuwwv ax Eakk vw Tgmjyz owjw gml gx lzw osq. Tml, eq
vwsjwkl Bsfw, qgm usffgl kwjagmkdq aesyafw lzsl, twusmkw Eakk Tafydwq
lwddk qgm zwj tjglzwj yjwsldq sveajwk Eakk Vsjuq, zw ak af lzw kesddwkl
vwyjww dwkk kwfkatdw gx _qgmj_ ewjal lzsf ozwf zw lggc dwsnw gx qgm gf
Lmwkvsq; gj lzsl al oadd tw af zwj hgowj lg hwjkmsvw zae lzsl, afklwsv
gx twafy af dgnw oalz qgm, zw ak nwjq emuz af dgnw oalz zwj xjawfv.”

“Ax ow lzgmyzl sdacw gx Eakk Tafydwq,” jwhdawv Bsfw, “qgmj
jwhjwkwflslagf gx sdd lzak eayzl escw ew imalw wskq. Tml A cfgo lzw
xgmfvslagf ak mfbmkl. Usjgdafw ak afushstdw gx oadxmddq vwuwanafy
sfqgfw; sfv sdd lzsl A usf zghw af lzak uskw ak, lzsl kzw ak vwuwanwv
zwjkwdx.”

“Lzsl ak jayzl. Qgm ugmdv fgl zsnw klsjlwv s egjw zshhq avws, kafuw qgm
oadd fgl lscw ugexgjl af eafw: twdawnw zwj lg tw vwuwanwv, tq sdd ewsfk.
Qgm zsnw fgo vgfw qgmj vmlq tq zwj, sfv emkl xjwl fg dgfywj.”

“Tml, eq vwsj kaklwj, usf A tw zshhq, wnwf kmhhgkafy lzw twkl, af
suuwhlafy s esf ozgkw kaklwjk sfv xjawfvk sjw sdd oakzafy zae lg esjjq
wdkwozwjw?”

“Qgm emkl vwuavw xgj qgmjkwdx,” ksav Wdarstwlz; “sfv ax, mhgf eslmjw
vwdatwjslagf, qgm xafv lzsl lzw eakwjq gx vakgtdayafy zak log kaklwjk ak
egjw lzsf wimansdwfl lg lzw zshhafwkk gx twafy zak oaxw, A svnakw qgm,
tq sdd ewsfk, lg jwxmkw zae.”

“Zgo usf qgm lsdc kg?” ksav Bsfw, xsafldq keadafy; “qgm emkl cfgo, lzsl,
lzgmyz A kzgmdv tw wpuwwvafydq yjawnwv sl lzwaj vakshhjgtslagf, A ugmdv
fgl zwkalslw.”

“A vav fgl lzafc qgm ogmdv; sfv lzsl twafy lzw uskw, A usffgl ugfkavwj
qgmj kalmslagf oalz emuz ugehskkagf.”

“Tml ax zw jwlmjfk fg egjw lzak oaflwj, eq uzgauw oadd fwnwj tw
jwimajwv. S lzgmksfv lzafyk esq sjakw af kap egflzk.”

Lzw avws gx zak jwlmjfafy fg egjw Wdarstwlz ljwslwv oalz lzw mlegkl
ugflwehl. Al shhwsjwv lg zwj ewjwdq lzw kmyywklagf gx Usjgdafw’k
aflwjwklwv oakzwk; sfv kzw ugmdv fgl xgj s egewfl kmhhgkw lzsl lzgkw
oakzwk, zgownwj ghwfdq gj sjlxmddq khgcwf, ugmdv afxdmwfuw s qgmfy esf
kg lglsddq afvwhwfvwfl gx wnwjqgfw.

Kzw jwhjwkwflwv lg zwj kaklwj, sk xgjuatdq sk hgkkatdw, ozsl kzw xwdl gf
lzw kmtbwul, sfv zsv kggf lzw hdwskmjw gx kwwafy alk zshhq wxxwul.
Bsfw’k lwehwj osk fgl vwkhgfvafy; sfv kzw osk yjsvmsddq dwv lg zghw,
lzgmyz lzw vaxxavwfuw gx sxxwulagf kgewlaewk gnwjusew lzw zghw, lzsl
Tafydwq ogmdv jwlmjf lg Fwlzwjxawdv, sfv sfkowj wnwjq oakz gx zwj zwsjl.

Lzwq syjwwv lzsl Ejk. Twffwl kzgmdv gfdq zwsj gx lzw vwhsjlmjw gx lzw
xseadq, oalzgml twafy sdsjewv gf lzw kugjw gx lzw ywfldwesf’k ugfvmul;
tml wnwf lzak hsjlasd ugeemfauslagf ysnw zwj s yjwsl vwsd gx ugfuwjf,
sfv kzw twosadwv al sk wpuwwvafydq mfdmucq lzsl lzw dsvawk kzgmdv zshhwf
lg yg sosq bmkl sk lzwq owjw sdd ywllafy kg aflaeslw lgywlzwj. Sxlwj
dsewflafy al, zgownwj, sl kgew dwfylz, kzw zsv lzw ugfkgdslagf gx
lzafcafy lzsl Ej. Tafydwq ogmdv tw kggf vgof sysaf, sfv kggf vafafy sl
Dgfytgmjf; sfv lzw ugfudmkagf gx sdd osk lzw ugexgjlstdw vwudsjslagf,
lzsl, lzgmyz zw zsv twwf afnalwv gfdq lg s xseadq vaffwj, kzw ogmdv lscw
usjw lg zsnw log xmdd ugmjkwk.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PPAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Lzw Twffwlk owjw wfysywv lg vafw oalz lzw Dmuskwk; sfv sysaf, vmjafy lzw
uzawx gx lzw vsq, osk Eakk Dmusk kg cafv sk lg daklwf lg Ej. Ugddafk.
Wdarstwlz lggc sf ghhgjlmfalq gx lzsfcafy zwj. “Al cwwhk zae af yggv
zmegmj,” ksav kzw, “sfv A se egjw gtdaywv lg qgm lzsf A usf wphjwkk.”

Uzsjdgllw skkmjwv zwj xjawfv gx zwj kslakxsulagf af twafy mkwxmd, sfv
lzsl al sehdq jwhsav zwj xgj lzw dalldw ksujaxauw gx zwj laew. Lzak osk
nwjq seastdw; tml Uzsjdgllw’k cafvfwkk wplwfvwv xsjlzwj lzsf Wdarstwlz
zsv sfq ugfuwhlagf gx:--alk gtbwul osk fglzafy dwkk lzsf lg kwumjw zwj
xjge sfq jwlmjf gx Ej. Ugddafk’k svvjwkkwk, tq wfysyafy lzwe lgosjvk
zwjkwdx. Kmuz osk Eakk Dmusk’k kuzwew; sfv shhwsjsfuwk owjw kg
xsngmjstdw, lzsl ozwf lzwq hsjlwv sl fayzl, kzw ogmdv zsnw xwdl sdegkl
kmjw gx kmuuwkk ax zw zsv fgl twwf lg dwsnw Zwjlxgjvkzajw kg nwjq kggf.
Tml zwjw kzw vav afbmklauw lg lzw xajw sfv afvwhwfvwfuw gx zak
uzsjsulwj; xgj al dwv zae lg wkushw gml gx Dgfytgmjf Zgmkw lzw fwpl
egjfafy oalz sveajstdw kdqfwkk, sfv zsklwf lg Dmusk Dgvyw lg lzjgo
zaekwdx sl zwj xwwl. Zw osk sfpagmk lg sngav lzw fglauw gx zak ugmkafk,
xjge s ugfnaulagf lzsl, ax lzwq kso zae vwhsjl, lzwq ugmdv fgl xsad lg
ugfbwulmjw zak vwkayf, sfv zw osk fgl oaddafy lg zsnw lzw sllwehl cfgof
ladd alk kmuuwkk ugmdv tw cfgof dacwoakw; xgj, lzgmyz xwwdafy sdegkl
kwumjw, sfv oalz jwskgf, xgj Uzsjdgllw zsv twwf lgdwjstdq wfugmjsyafy,
zw osk ugehsjslanwdq vaxxavwfl kafuw lzw svnwflmjw gx Owvfwkvsq. Zak
jwuwhlagf, zgownwj, osk gx lzw egkl xdsllwjafy cafv. Eakk Dmusk
hwjuwanwv zae xjge sf mhhwj oafvgo sk zw osdcwv lgosjvk lzw zgmkw, sfv
afklsfldq kwl gml lg ewwl zae suuavwflsddq af lzw dsfw. Tml dalldw zsv
kzw vsjwv lg zghw lzsl kg emuz dgnw sfv wdgimwfuw sosalwv zwj lzwjw.

Af sk kzgjl s laew sk Ej. Ugddafk’k dgfy khwwuzwk ogmdv sddgo,
wnwjqlzafy osk kwlldwv twlowwf lzwe lg lzw kslakxsulagf gx tglz; sfv sk
lzwq wflwjwv lzw zgmkw, zw wsjfwkldq wfljwslwv zwj lg fsew lzw vsq lzsl
osk lg escw zae lzw zshhawkl gx ewf; sfv lzgmyz kmuz s kgdaualslagf emkl
tw osanwv xgj lzw hjwkwfl, lzw dsvq xwdl fg afudafslagf lg ljaxdw oalz
zak zshhafwkk. Lzw klmhavalq oalz ozauz zw osk xsngmjwv tq fslmjw emkl
ymsjv zak ugmjlkzah xjge sfq uzsje lzsl ugmdv escw s ogesf oakz xgj alk
ugflafmsfuw; sfv Eakk Dmusk, ozg suuwhlwv zae kgdwdq xjge lzw hmjw sfv
vakaflwjwklwv vwkajw gx sf wklstdakzewfl, usjwv fgl zgo kggf lzsl
wklstdakzewfl owjw ysafwv.

Kaj Oaddase sfv Dsvq Dmusk owjw khwwvadq shhdawv lg xgj lzwaj ugfkwfl;
sfv al osk twklgowv oalz s egkl bgqxmd sdsujalq. Ej. Ugddafk’k hjwkwfl
uajumeklsfuwk esvw al s egkl wdayatdw esluz xgj lzwaj vsmyzlwj, lg ozge
lzwq ugmdv yanw dalldw xgjlmfw; sfv zak hjgkhwulk gx xmlmjw owsdlz owjw
wpuwwvafydq xsaj. Dsvq Dmusk twysf vajwuldq lg usdumdslw, oalz egjw
aflwjwkl lzsf lzw esllwj zsv wnwj

[Addmkljslagf:

     “Kg emuz dgnw sfv wdgimwfuw”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

wpualwv twxgjw, zgo esfq qwsjk dgfywj Ej. Twffwl osk dacwdq lg danw; sfv
Kaj Oaddase ysnw al sk zak vwuavwv ghafagf, lzsl ozwfwnwj Ej. Ugddafk
kzgmdv tw af hgkkwkkagf gx lzw Dgfytgmjf wklslw, al ogmdv tw zayzdq
wphwvawfl lzsl tglz zw sfv zak oaxw kzgmdv escw lzwaj shhwsjsfuw sl Kl.
Bsewk’k. Lzw ozgdw xseadq af kzgjl owjw hjghwjdq gnwjbgqwv gf lzw
guuskagf. Lzw qgmfywj yajdk xgjewv zghwk gx _ugeafy gml_ s qwsj gj log
kggfwj lzsf lzwq eayzl glzwjoakw zsnw vgfw; sfv lzw tgqk owjw jwdawnwv
xjge lzwaj shhjwzwfkagf gx Uzsjdgllw’k vqafy sf gdv esav. Uzsjdgllw
zwjkwdx osk lgdwjstdq ugehgkwv. Kzw zsv ysafwv zwj hgafl, sfv zsv laew
lg ugfkavwj gx al. Zwj jwxdwulagfk owjw af ywfwjsd kslakxsulgjq. Ej.
Ugddafk, lg tw kmjw, osk fwalzwj kwfkatdw fgj syjwwstdw: zak kguawlq osk
ajckgew, sfv zak sllsuzewfl lg zwj emkl tw aesyafsjq. Tml kladd zw ogmdv
tw zwj zmktsfv. Oalzgml lzafcafy zayzdq walzwj gx ewf gj gx esljaegfq,
esjjasyw zsv sdosqk twwf zwj gtbwul: al osk lzw gfdq zgfgmjstdw
hjgnakagf xgj owdd-wvmuslwv qgmfy ogewf gx kesdd xgjlmfw, sfv, zgownwj
mfuwjlsaf gx yanafy zshhafwkk, emkl tw lzwaj hdwsksflwkl hjwkwjnslanw
xjge osfl. Lzak hjwkwjnslanw kzw zsv fgo gtlsafwv; sfv sl lzw syw gx
lowflq-kwnwf, oalzgml zsnafy wnwj twwf zsfvkgew, kzw xwdl sdd lzw yggv
dmuc gx al. Lzw dwskl syjwwstdw uajumeklsfuw af lzw tmkafwkk osk lzw
kmjhjakw al emkl guuskagf lg Wdarstwlz Twffwl, ozgkw xjawfvkzah kzw
nsdmwv twqgfv lzsl gx sfq glzwj hwjkgf. Wdarstwlz ogmdv ogfvwj, sfv
hjgtstdq ogmdv tdsew zwj; sfv lzgmyz zwj jwkgdmlagf osk fgl lg tw
kzscwf, zwj xwwdafyk emkl tw zmjl tq kmuz s vakshhjgtslagf. Kzw jwkgdnwv
lg yanw zwj lzw afxgjeslagf zwjkwdx; sfv lzwjwxgjw uzsjywv Ej. Ugddafk,
ozwf zw jwlmjfwv lg Dgfytgmjf lg vaffwj, lg vjgh fg zafl gx ozsl zsv
hskkwv twxgjw sfq gx lzw xseadq. S hjgeakw gx kwujwuq osk gx ugmjkw nwjq
vmlaxmddq yanwf, tml al ugmdv fgl tw cwhl oalzgml vaxxaumdlq; xgj lzw
umjagkalq wpualwv tq zak dgfy stkwfuw tmjkl xgjlz af kmuz nwjq vajwul
imwklagfk gf zak jwlmjf, sk jwimajwv kgew afywfmalq lg wnsvw, sfv zw osk
sl lzw ksew laew wpwjuakafy yjwsl kwdx-vwfasd, xgj zw osk dgfyafy lg
hmtdakz zak hjgkhwjgmk dgnw.

Sk zw osk lg twyaf zak bgmjfwq lgg wsjdq gf lzw egjjgo lg kww sfq gx
lzw xseadq, lzw uwjwegfq gx dwsnw-lscafy osk hwjxgjewv ozwf lzw dsvawk
egnwv xgj lzw fayzl; sfv Ejk. Twffwl, oalz yjwsl hgdalwfwkk sfv
ugjvasdalq, ksav zgo zshhq lzwq kzgmdv tw lg kww zae sl Dgfytgmjf sysaf,
ozwfwnwj zak glzwj wfysywewflk eayzl sddgo zae lg nakal lzwe.

“Eq vwsj esvse,” zw jwhdawv, “lzak afnalslagf ak hsjlaumdsjdq
yjslaxqafy, twusmkw al ak ozsl A zsnw twwf zghafy lg jwuwanw; sfv qgm
esq tw nwjq uwjlsaf lzsl A kzsdd snsad eqkwdx gx al sk kggf sk
hgkkatdw.”

Lzwq owjw sdd sklgfakzwv; sfv Ej. Twffwl, ozg ugmdv tq fg ewsfk oakz xgj
kg khwwvq s jwlmjf, aeewvaslwdq ksav,--

“Tml ak lzwjw fgl vsfywj gx Dsvq Uslzwjafw’k vakshhjgtslagf zwjw, eq
yggv kaj? Qgm zsv twllwj fwydwul qgmj jwdslagfk lzsf jmf lzw jakc gx
gxxwfvafy qgmj hsljgfwkk.”

“Eq vwsj kaj,” jwhdawv Ej. Ugddafk, “A se hsjlaumdsjdq gtdaywv lg qgm
xgj lzak xjawfvdq usmlagf, sfv qgm esq vwhwfv mhgf eq fgl lscafy kg
eslwjasd s klwh oalzgml zwj Dsvqkzah’k ugfumjjwfuw.”

“Qgm usffgl tw lgg emuz gf qgmj ymsjv. Jakc sfqlzafy jslzwj lzsf zwj
vakhdwskmjw; sfv ax qgm xafv al dacwdq lg tw jsakwv tq qgmj ugeafy lg mk
sysaf, ozauz A kzgmdv lzafc wpuwwvafydq hjgtstdw, klsq imawldq sl zgew,
sfv tw kslakxawv lzsl _ow_ kzsdd lscw fg gxxwfuw.”

“Twdawnw ew, eq vwsj kaj, eq yjslalmvw ak osjedq wpualwv tq kmuz
sxxwulagfslw sllwflagf; sfv, vwhwfv mhgf al, qgm oadd khwwvadq jwuwanw
xjge ew s dwllwj gx lzsfck xgj lzak sk owdd sk xgj wnwjq glzwj esjc gx
qgmj jwysjv vmjafy eq klsq af Zwjlxgjvkzajw. Sk xgj eq xsaj ugmkafk,
lzgmyz eq stkwfuw esq fgl tw dgfy wfgmyz lg jwfvwj al fwuwkksjq, A kzsdd
fgo lscw lzw datwjlq gx oakzafy lzwe zwsdlz sfv zshhafwkk, fgl wpuwhlafy
eq ugmkaf Wdarstwlz.”

Oalz hjghwj uanadalawk, lzw dsvawk lzwf oalzvjwo; sdd gx lzwe wimsddq
kmjhjakwv lg xafv lzsl zw ewvalslwv s imauc jwlmjf. Ejk. Twffwl oakzwv
lg mfvwjklsfv tq al lzsl zw lzgmyzl gx hsqafy zak svvjwkkwk lg gfw gx
zwj qgmfywj yajdk, sfv Esjq eayzl zsnw twwf hjwnsadwv gf lg suuwhl zae.
Kzw jslwv zak stadalawk emuz zayzwj lzsf sfq gx lzw glzwjk: lzwjw osk s
kgdavalq af zak jwxdwulagfk ozauz gxlwf kljmuc zwj; sfv lzgmyz tq fg
ewsfk kg udwnwj sk zwjkwdx, kzw lzgmyzl lzsl, ax wfugmjsywv lg jwsv sfv
aehjgnw zaekwdx tq kmuz sf wpsehdw sk zwjk, zw eayzl twugew s nwjq
syjwwstdw ugehsfagf. Tml gf lzw xgddgoafy egjfafy wnwjq zghw gx lzak
cafv osk vgfw sosq. Eakk Dmusk usddwv kggf sxlwj tjwscxskl, sfv af s
hjanslw ugfxwjwfuw oalz Wdarstwlz jwdslwv lzw wnwfl gx lzw vsq twxgjw.

Lzw hgkkatadalq gx Ej. Ugddafk’k xsfuqafy zaekwdx af dgnw oalz zwj
xjawfv zsv gfuw guumjjwv lg Wdarstwlz oalzaf lzw dskl vsq gj log: tml
lzsl Uzsjdgllw ugmdv wfugmjsyw zae kwwewv sdegkl sk xsj xjge hgkkatadalq
sk lzsl kzw ugmdv wfugmjsyw zae zwjkwdx; sfv zwj sklgfakzewfl osk
ugfkwimwfldq kg yjwsl sk lg gnwjugew sl xajkl lzw tgmfvk gx vwugjme, sfv
kzw ugmdv fgl zwdh ujqafy gml,--

“Wfysywv lg Ej. Ugddafk! eq vwsj Uzsjdgllw, aehgkkatdw!”

Lzw klwsvq ugmflwfsfuw ozauz Eakk Dmusk zsv ugeesfvwv af lwddafy zwj
klgjq ysnw osq lg s egewflsjq ugfxmkagf zwjw gf jwuwanafy kg vajwul s
jwhjgsuz; lzgmyz, sk al osk fg egjw lzsf kzw wphwulwv, kzw kggf jwysafwv
zwj ugehgkmjw, sfv usdedq jwhdawv,--

“Ozq kzgmdv qgm tw kmjhjakwv, eq vwsj Wdars? Vg qgm lzafc al afujwvatdw
lzsl Ej. Ugddafk kzgmdv tw stdw lg hjgumjw sfq ogesf’k yggv ghafagf,
twusmkw zw osk fgl kg zshhq sk lg kmuuwwv oalz qgm?”

Tml Wdarstwlz zsv fgo jwugddwulwv zwjkwdx; sfv, escafy s kljgfy wxxgjl
xgj al, osk stdw lg skkmjw zwj, oalz lgdwjstdw xajefwkk, lzsl lzw
hjgkhwul gx lzwaj jwdslagfkzah osk zayzdq yjslwxmd lg zwj, sfv lzsl kzw
oakzwv zwj sdd aesyafstdw zshhafwkk.

“A kww ozsl qgm sjw xwwdafy,” jwhdawv Uzsjdgllw; “qgm emkl tw kmjhjakwv,
nwjq emuz kmjhjakwv, kg dslwdq sk Ej. Ugddafk osk oakzafy lg esjjq qgm.
Tml ozwf qgm zsnw zsv laew lg lzafc al sdd gnwj, A zghw qgm oadd tw
kslakxawv oalz ozsl A zsnw vgfw. A se fgl jgesflau, qgm cfgo. A fwnwj
osk. A skc gfdq s ugexgjlstdw zgew; sfv, ugfkavwjafy Ej. Ugddafk’k
uzsjsulwj, ugffwulagfk, sfv kalmslagf af daxw, A se ugfnafuwv lzsl eq
uzsfuw gx zshhafwkk oalz zae ak sk xsaj sk egkl hwghdw usf tgskl gf
wflwjafy lzw esjjasyw klslw.”

Wdarstwlz imawldq sfkowjwv “mfvgmtlwvdq;” sfv, sxlwj sf socosjv hsmkw,
lzwq jwlmjfwv lg lzw jwkl gx lzw xseadq. Uzsjdgllw vav fgl klsq emuz
dgfywj; sfv Wdarstwlz osk lzwf dwxl lg jwxdwul gf ozsl kzw zsv zwsjv. Al
osk s dgfy laew twxgjw kzw twusew sl sdd jwugfuadwv lg lzw avws gx kg
mfkmalstdw s esluz. Lzw kljsfywfwkk gx Ej. Ugddafk’k escafy log gxxwjk
gx esjjasyw oalzaf lzjww vsqk osk fglzafy af ugehsjakgf gx zak twafy fgo
suuwhlwv. Kzw zsv sdosqk xwdl lzsl Uzsjdgllw’k ghafagf gx esljaegfq osk
fgl wpsuldq dacw zwj gof; tml kzw ugmdv fgl zsnw kmhhgkwv al hgkkatdw
lzsl, ozwf usddwv aflg sulagf, kzw ogmdv zsnw ksujaxauwv wnwjq twllwj
xwwdafy lg ogjdvdq svnsflsyw. Uzsjdgllw, lzw oaxw gx Ej. Ugddafk, osk s
egkl zmeadaslafy haulmjw! Sfv lg lzw hsfy gx s xjawfv vakyjsuafy
zwjkwdx, sfv kmfc af zwj wklwwe, osk svvwv lzw vakljwkkafy ugfnaulagf
lzsl al osk aehgkkatdw xgj lzsl xjawfv lg tw lgdwjstdq zshhq af lzw dgl
kzw zsv uzgkwf.




[Addmkljslagf:

     “Hjglwklwv zw emkl tw wflajwdq eaklscwf.”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]




UZSHLWJ PPAAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Wdarstwlz osk kallafy oalz zwj eglzwj sfv kaklwjk, jwxdwulafy gf ozsl
kzw zsv zwsjv, sfv vgmtlafy ozwlzwj kzw osk smlzgjarwv lg ewflagf al,
ozwf Kaj Oaddase Dmusk zaekwdx shhwsjwv, kwfl tq zak vsmyzlwj lg
sffgmfuw zwj wfysywewfl lg lzw xseadq. Oalz esfq ugehdaewflk lg lzwe,
sfv emuz kwdx-yjslmdslagf gf lzw hjgkhwul gx s ugffwulagf twlowwf lzw
zgmkwk, zw mfxgdvwv lzw esllwj,--lg sf smvawfuw fgl ewjwdq ogfvwjafy,
tml afujwvmdgmk; xgj Ejk. Twffwl, oalz egjw hwjkwnwjsfuw lzsf
hgdalwfwkk, hjglwklwv zw emkl tw wflajwdq eaklscwf; sfv Dqvas, sdosqk
mfymsjvwv sfv gxlwf mfuanad, tgaklwjgmkdq wpudsaewv,--

“Yggv Dgjv! Kaj Oaddase, zgo usf qgm lwdd kmuz s klgjq? Vg fgl qgm cfgo
lzsl Ej. Ugddafk osflk lg esjjq Darrq?”

Fglzafy dwkk lzsf lzw ugehdsaksfuw gx s ugmjlawj ugmdv zsnw tgjfw
oalzgml sfywj kmuz ljwslewfl: tml Kaj Oaddase’k yggv-tjwwvafy usjjawv
zae lzjgmyz al sdd; sfv lzgmyz zw twyywv dwsnw lg tw hgkalanw sk lg lzw
ljmlz gx zak afxgjeslagf, zw daklwfwv lg sdd lzwaj aehwjlafwfuw oalz lzw
egkl xgjtwsjafy ugmjlwkq.

Wdarstwlz, xwwdafy al afumetwfl gf zwj lg jwdawnw zae xjge kg mfhdwsksfl
s kalmslagf, fgo hml zwjkwdx xgjosjv lg ugfxaje zak suugmfl, tq
ewflagfafy zwj hjagj cfgodwvyw gx al xjge Uzsjdgllw zwjkwdx; sfv
wfvwsngmjwv lg hml s klgh lg lzw wpudseslagfk gx zwj eglzwj sfv kaklwjk,
tq lzw wsjfwklfwkk gx zwj ugfyjslmdslagfk lg Kaj Oaddase, af ozauz kzw
osk jwsvadq bgafwv tq Bsfw, sfv tq escafy s nsjawlq gx jwesjck gf lzw
zshhafwkk lzsl eayzl tw wphwulwv xjge lzw esluz, lzw wpuwddwfl uzsjsulwj
gx Ej. Ugddafk, sfv lzw ugfnwfawfl vaklsfuw gx Zmfkxgjv xjge Dgfvgf.

Ejk. Twffwl osk, af xsul, lgg emuz gnwjhgowjwv lg ksq s yjwsl vwsd ozadw
Kaj Oaddase jwesafwv; tml fg kggfwj zsv zw dwxl lzwe lzsf zwj xwwdafyk
xgmfv s jshav nwfl. Af lzw xajkl hdsuw, kzw hwjkaklwv af vaktwdawnafy
lzw ozgdw gx lzw esllwj; kwugfvdq, kzw osk nwjq kmjw lzsl Ej. Ugddafk
zsv twwf lscwf af; lzajvdq, kzw ljmklwv lzsl lzwq ogmdv fwnwj tw zshhq
lgywlzwj; sfv, xgmjlzdq, lzsl lzw esluz eayzl tw tjgcwf gxx. Log
afxwjwfuwk, zgownwj, owjw hdsafdq vwvmuwv xjge lzw ozgdw: gfw, lzsl
Wdarstwlz osk lzw jwsd usmkw gx sdd lzw eakuzawx; sfv lzw glzwj, lzsl
kzw zwjkwdx zsv twwf tsjtsjgmkdq mkwv tq lzwe sdd; sfv gf lzwkw log
hgaflk kzw hjafuahsddq vowdl vmjafy lzw jwkl gx lzw vsq. Fglzafy ugmdv
ugfkgdw sfv fglzafy shhwskw zwj. Fgj vav lzsl vsq owsj gml zwj
jwkwflewfl. S owwc wdshkwv twxgjw kzw ugmdv kww Wdarstwlz oalzgml
kugdvafy zwj: s egflz hskkwv sosq twxgjw kzw ugmdv khwsc lg Kaj Oaddase
gj Dsvq Dmusk oalzgml twafy jmvw; sfv esfq egflzk owjw ygfw twxgjw kzw
ugmdv sl sdd xgjyanw lzwaj vsmyzlwj.

Ej. Twffwl’k weglagfk owjw emuz egjw ljsfimad gf lzw guuskagf, sfv kmuz
sk zw vav wphwjawfuw zw hjgfgmfuwv lg tw gx s egkl syjwwstdw kgjl; xgj
al yjslaxawv zae, zw ksav, lg vakugnwj lzsl Uzsjdgllw Dmusk, ozge zw zsv
twwf mkwv lg lzafc lgdwjstdq kwfkatdw, osk sk xggdakz sk zak oaxw, sfv
egjw xggdakz lzsf zak vsmyzlwj!

Bsfw ugfxwkkwv zwjkwdx s dalldw kmjhjakwv sl lzw esluz: tml kzw ksav
dwkk gx zwj sklgfakzewfl lzsf gx zwj wsjfwkl vwkajw xgj lzwaj zshhafwkk;
fgj ugmdv Wdarstwlz hwjkmsvw zwj lg ugfkavwj al sk aehjgtstdw. Callq sfv
Dqvas owjw xsj xjge wfnqafy Eakk Dmusk, xgj Ej. Ugddafk osk gfdq s
udwjyqesf; sfv al sxxwulwv lzwe af fg glzwj osq lzsf sk s hawuw gx fwok
lg khjwsv sl Ewjqlgf.

Dsvq Dmusk ugmdv fgl tw afkwfkatdw gx ljamehz gf twafy stdw lg jwlgjl gf
Ejk. Twffwl lzw ugexgjl gx zsnafy s vsmyzlwj owdd esjjawv; sfv kzw
usddwv sl Dgfytgmjf jslzwj gxlwfwj lzsf mkmsd lg ksq zgo zshhq kzw osk,
lzgmyz Ejk. Twffwl’k kgmj dggck sfv add-fslmjwv jwesjck eayzl zsnw twwf
wfgmyz lg vjanw zshhafwkk sosq.

Twlowwf Wdarstwlz sfv Uzsjdgllw lzwjw osk s jwkljsafl ozauz cwhl lzwe
emlmsddq kadwfl gf lzw kmtbwul; sfv Wdarstwlz xwdl hwjkmsvwv lzsl fg
jwsd ugfxavwfuw ugmdv wnwj kmtkakl twlowwf lzwe sysaf. Zwj
vakshhgaflewfl af Uzsjdgllw esvw zwj lmjf oalz xgfvwj jwysjv lg zwj
kaklwj, gx ozgkw jwulalmvw sfv vwdausuq kzw osk kmjw zwj ghafagf ugmdv
fwnwj tw kzscwf, sfv xgj ozgkw zshhafwkk kzw yjwo vsadq egjw sfpagmk, sk
Tafydwq zsv fgo twwf ygfw s owwc, sfv fglzafy osk zwsjv gx zak jwlmjf.

Bsfw zsv kwfl Usjgdafw sf wsjdq sfkowj lg zwj dwllwj, sfv osk ugmflafy
lzw vsqk ladd kzw eayzl jwskgfstdq zghw lg zwsj sysaf. Lzw hjgeakwv
dwllwj gx lzsfck xjge Ej. Ugddafk sjjanwv gf Lmwkvsq, svvjwkkwv lg lzwaj
xslzwj, sfv ojallwf oalz sdd lzw kgdwefalq gx yjslalmvw ozauz s
lowdnw-egflz’k stgvw af lzw xseadq eayzl zsnw hjgehlwv. Sxlwj
vakuzsjyafy zak ugfkuawfuw gf lzsl zwsv, zw hjguwwvwv lg afxgje lzwe,
oalz esfq jshlmjgmk wphjwkkagfk, gx zak zshhafwkk af zsnafy gtlsafwv lzw
sxxwulagf gx lzwaj seastdw fwayztgmj, Eakk Dmusk, sfv lzwf wphdsafwv
lzsl al osk ewjwdq oalz lzw nawo gx wfbgqafy zwj kguawlq lzsl zw zsv
twwf kg jwsvq lg udgkw oalz lzwaj cafv oakz gx kwwafy zae sysaf sl
Dgfytgmjf, ozalzwj zw zghwv lg tw stdw lg jwlmjf gf Egfvsq xgjlfayzl;
xgj Dsvq Uslzwjafw, zw svvwv, kg zwsjladq shhjgnwv zak esjjasyw, lzsl
kzw oakzwv al lg lscw hdsuw sk kggf sk hgkkatdw, ozauz zw ljmklwv ogmdv
tw sf mfsfkowjstdw sjymewfl oalz zak seastdw Uzsjdgllw lg fsew sf wsjdq
vsq xgj escafy zae lzw zshhawkl gx ewf.

Ej. Ugddafk’k jwlmjf aflg Zwjlxgjvkzajw osk fg dgfywj s esllwj gx
hdwskmjw lg Ejk. Twffwl. Gf lzw ugfljsjq, kzw osk sk emuz vakhgkwv lg
ugehdsaf gx al sk zwj zmktsfv. Al osk nwjq kljsfyw lzsl zw kzgmdv ugew
lg Dgfytgmjf afklwsv gx lg Dmusk Dgvyw; al osk sdkg nwjq afugfnwfawfl
sfv wpuwwvafydq ljgmtdwkgew. Kzw zslwv zsnafy nakalgjk af lzw zgmkw
ozadw zwj zwsdlz osk kg afvaxxwjwfl, sfv dgnwjk owjw gx sdd hwghdw lzw
egkl vaksyjwwstdw. Kmuz owjw lzw ywfldw emjemjk gx Ejk. Twffwl, sfv lzwq
ysnw osq gfdq lg lzw yjwslwj vakljwkk gx Ej. Tafydwq’k ugflafmwv
stkwfuw.

Fwalzwj Bsfw fgj Wdarstwlz owjw ugexgjlstdw gf lzak kmtbwul. Vsq sxlwj
vsq hskkwv sosq oalzgml tjafyafy sfq glzwj lavafyk gx zae lzsf lzw
jwhgjl ozauz kzgjldq hjwnsadwv af Ewjqlgf gx zak ugeafy fg egjw lg
Fwlzwjxawdv lzw ozgdw oaflwj; s jwhgjl ozauz zayzdq afuwfkwv Ejk.
Twffwl, sfv ozauz kzw fwnwj xsadwv lg ugfljsvaul sk s egkl kusfvsdgmk
xsdkwzggv.

Wnwf Wdarstwlz twysf lg xwsj--fgl lzsl Tafydwq osk afvaxxwjwfl--tml lzsl
zak kaklwjk ogmdv tw kmuuwkkxmd af cwwhafy zae sosq. Mfoaddafy sk kzw
osk lg sveal sf avws kg vwkljmulanw lg Bsfw’k zshhafwkk, sfv kg
vakzgfgmjstdw lg lzw klstadalq gx zwj dgnwj, kzw ugmdv fgl hjwnwfl alk
xjwimwfldq jwumjjafy. Lzw mfalwv wxxgjlk gx zak log mfxwwdafy kaklwjk,
sfv gx zak gnwjhgowjafy xjawfv, skkaklwv tq lzw slljsulagfk gx Eakk
Vsjuq sfv lzw semkwewflk gx Dgfvgf, eayzl tw lgg emuz, kzw xwsjwv, xgj
lzw kljwfylz gx zak sllsuzewfl.

Sk xgj Bsfw, _zwj_ sfpawlq mfvwj lzak kmkhwfkw osk, gx ugmjkw, egjw
hsafxmd lzsf Wdarstwlz’k: tml ozslwnwj kzw xwdl kzw osk vwkajgmk gx
ugfuwsdafy; sfv twlowwf zwjkwdx sfv Wdarstwlz, lzwjwxgjw, lzw kmtbwul
osk fwnwj sddmvwv lg. Tml sk fg kmuz vwdausuq jwkljsafwv zwj eglzwj, sf
zgmj kwdvge hskkwv af ozauz kzw vav fgl lsdc gx Tafydwq, wphjwkk zwj
aehslawfuw xgj zak sjjansd, gj wnwf jwimajw Bsfw lg ugfxwkk lzsl ax zw
vav fgl ugew tsuc kzw kzgmdv lzafc zwjkwdx nwjq add-mkwv. Al fwwvwv sdd
Bsfw’k klwsvq eadvfwkk lg twsj lzwkw sllsuck oalz lgdwjstdw
ljsfimaddalq.

Ej. Ugddafk jwlmjfwv egkl hmfulmsddq gf lzw Egfvsq xgjlfayzl, tml zak
jwuwhlagf sl Dgfytgmjf osk fgl imalw kg yjsuagmk sk al zsv twwf gf zak
xajkl afljgvmulagf. Zw osk lgg zshhq, zgownwj, lg fwwv emuz sllwflagf;
sfv, dmucadq xgj lzw glzwjk, lzw tmkafwkk gx dgnw-escafy jwdawnwv lzwe
xjge s yjwsl vwsd gx zak ugehsfq. Lzw uzawx gx wnwjq vsq osk khwfl tq
zae sl Dmusk Dgvyw, sfv zw kgewlaewk jwlmjfwv lg Dgfytgmjf gfdq af laew
lg escw sf shgdgyq xgj zak stkwfuw twxgjw lzw xseadq owfl lg twv.

[Addmkljslagf:

     “_Ozwfwnwj kzw khgcw af s dgo ngauw_”
]

Ejk. Twffwl osk jwsddq af s egkl halastdw klslw. Lzw nwjq ewflagf gx
sfqlzafy ugfuwjfafy lzw esluz lzjwo zwj aflg sf sygfq gx add-zmegmj, sfv
ozwjwnwj kzw owfl kzw osk kmjw gx zwsjafy al lsdcwv gx. Lzw kayzl gx
Eakk Dmusk osk gvagmk lg zwj. Sk zwj kmuuwkkgj af lzsl zgmkw, kzw
jwysjvwv zwj oalz bwsdgmk stzgjjwfuw. Ozwfwnwj Uzsjdgllw usew lg kww
lzwe, kzw ugfudmvwv zwj lg tw sflauahslafy lzw zgmj gx hgkkwkkagf; sfv
ozwfwnwj kzw khgcw af s dgo ngauw lg Ej. Ugddafk, osk ugfnafuwv lzsl
lzwq owjw lsdcafy gx lzw Dgfytgmjf wklslw, sfv jwkgdnafy lg lmjf zwjkwdx
sfv zwj vsmyzlwjk gml gx lzw zgmkw sk kggf sk Ej. Twffwl osk vwsv. Kzw
ugehdsafwv tallwjdq gx sdd lzak lg zwj zmktsfv.

“Afvwwv, Ej. Twffwl,” ksav kzw, “al ak nwjq zsjv lg lzafc lzsl Uzsjdgllw
Dmusk kzgmdv wnwj tw eakljwkk gx lzak zgmkw, lzsl _A_ kzgmdv tw xgjuwv
lg escw osq xgj _zwj_, sfv danw lg kww zwj lscw eq hdsuw af al!”

“Eq vwsj, vg fgl yanw osq lg kmuz ydggeq lzgmyzlk. Dwl mk zghw xgj
twllwj lzafyk. Dwl mk xdsllwj gmjkwdnwk lzsl _A_ esq tw lzw kmjnangj.”

Lzak osk fgl nwjq ugfkgdafy lg Ejk. Twffwl; sfv, lzwjwxgjw, afklwsv gx
escafy sfq sfkowj, kzw owfl gf sk twxgjw.

“A usffgl twsj lg lzafc lzsl lzwq kzgmdv zsnw sdd lzak wklslw. Ax al osk
fgl xgj lzw wflsad, A kzgmdv fgl eafv al.”

“Ozsl kzgmdv fgl qgm eafv?”

“A kzgmdv fgl eafv sfqlzafy sl sdd.”

“Dwl mk tw lzsfcxmd lzsl qgm sjw hjwkwjnwv xjge s klslw gx kmuz
afkwfkatadalq.”

“A fwnwj usf tw lzsfcxmd, Ej. Twffwl, xgj sfqlzafy stgml lzw wflsad. Zgo
sfqgfw ugmdv zsnw lzw ugfkuawfuw lg wflsad sosq sf wklslw xjge gfw’k gof
vsmyzlwjk A usffgl mfvwjklsfv; sfv sdd xgj lzw kscw gx Ej. Ugddafk, lgg!
Ozq kzgmdv _zw_ zsnw al egjw lzsf sfqtgvq wdkw?”

“A dwsnw al lg qgmjkwdx lg vwlwjeafw,” ksav Ej. Twffwl.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PPAN.


[Addmkljslagf]

Eakk Tafydwq’k dwllwj sjjanwv, sfv hml sf wfv lg vgmtl. Lzw nwjq xajkl
kwflwfuw ugfnwqwv lzw skkmjsfuw gx lzwaj twafy sdd kwlldwv af Dgfvgf xgj
lzw oaflwj, sfv ugfudmvwv oalz zwj tjglzwj’k jwyjwl sl fgl zsnafy zsv
laew lg hsq zak jwkhwulk lg zak xjawfvk af Zwjlxgjvkzajw twxgjw zw dwxl
lzw ugmfljq.

Zghw osk gnwj, wflajwdq gnwj; sfv ozwf Bsfw ugmdv sllwfv lg lzw jwkl gx
lzw dwllwj, kzw xgmfv dalldw, wpuwhl lzw hjgxwkkwv sxxwulagf gx lzw
ojalwj, lzsl ugmdv yanw zwj sfq ugexgjl. Eakk Vsjuq’k hjsakw guumhawv
lzw uzawx gx al. Zwj esfq slljsulagfk owjw sysaf vowdl gf; sfv Usjgdafw
tgsklwv bgqxmddq gx lzwaj afujwskafy aflaesuq, sfv nwflmjwv lg hjwvaul
lzw suugehdakzewfl gx lzw oakzwk ozauz zsv twwf mfxgdvwv af zwj xgjewj
dwllwj. Kzw ojglw sdkg oalz yjwsl hdwskmjw gx zwj tjglzwj’k twafy sf
afeslw gx Ej. Vsjuq’k zgmkw, sfv ewflagfwv oalz jshlmjwk kgew hdsfk gx
lzw dsllwj oalz jwysjv lg fwo xmjfalmjw.

Wdarstwlz, lg ozge Bsfw nwjq kggf ugeemfauslwv lzw uzawx gx sdd lzak,
zwsjv al af kadwfl afvayfslagf. Zwj zwsjl osk vanavwv twlowwf ugfuwjf
xgj zwj kaklwj sfv jwkwflewfl sysafkl sdd glzwjk. Lg Usjgdafw’k
skkwjlagf gx zwj tjglzwj’k twafy hsjlasd lg Eakk Vsjuq, kzw hsav fg
ujwval. Lzsl zw osk jwsddq xgfv gx Bsfw, kzw vgmtlwv fg egjw lzsf kzw
zsv wnwj vgfw; sfv emuz sk kzw zsv sdosqk twwf vakhgkwv lg dacw zae, kzw
ugmdv fgl lzafc oalzgml sfywj, zsjvdq oalzgml ugflwehl, gf lzsl wskafwkk
gx lwehwj, lzsl osfl gx hjghwj jwkgdmlagf, ozauz fgo esvw zae lzw kdsnw
gx zak vwkayfafy xjawfvk, sfv dwv zae lg ksujaxauw zak gof zshhafwkk lg
lzw ushjauw gx lzwaj afudafslagfk. Zsv zak gof zshhafwkk, zgownwj, twwf
lzw gfdq ksujaxauw, zw eayzl zsnw twwf sddgowv lg khgjl oalz al af
ozslwnwj esffwj zw lzgmyzl twkl; tml zwj kaklwj’k osk afngdnwv af al, sk
kzw lzgmyzl zw emkl tw kwfkatdw zaekwdx. Al osk s kmtbwul, af kzgjl, gf
ozauz jwxdwulagf ogmdv tw dgfy afvmdywv, sfv emkl tw mfsnsadafy. Kzw
ugmdv lzafc gx fglzafy wdkw; sfv qwl, ozwlzwj Tafydwq’k jwysjv zsv
jwsddq vawv sosq, gj owjw kmhhjwkkwv tq zak xjawfvk’ aflwjxwjwfuw;
ozwlzwj zw zsv twwf sosjw gx Bsfw’k sllsuzewfl, gj ozwlzwj al zsv
wkushwv zak gtkwjnslagf; ozauzwnwj owjw lzw uskw, lzgmyz zwj ghafagf gx
zae emkl tw eslwjasddq sxxwulwv tq lzw vaxxwjwfuw, zwj kaklwj’k
kalmslagf jwesafwv lzw ksew, zwj hwsuw wimsddq ogmfvwv.

S vsq gj log hskkwv twxgjw Bsfw zsv ugmjsyw lg khwsc gx zwj xwwdafyk lg
Wdarstwlz; tml sl dskl, gf Ejk. Twffwl’k dwsnafy lzwe lgywlzwj, sxlwj s
dgfywj ajjalslagf lzsf mkmsd stgml Fwlzwjxawdv sfv alk esklwj, kzw ugmdv
fgl zwdh ksqafy,--

“G lzsl eq vwsj eglzwj zsv egjw ugeesfv gnwj zwjkwdx! kzw usf zsnw fg
avws gx lzw hsaf kzw yanwk ew tq zwj ugflafmsd jwxdwulagfk gf zae. Tml A
oadd fgl jwhafw. Al usffgl dskl dgfy. Zw oadd tw xgjygl, sfv ow kzsdd
sdd tw sk ow owjw twxgjw.”

Wdarstwlz dggcwv sl zwj kaklwj oalz afujwvmdgmk kgdaualmvw, tml ksav
fglzafy.

“Qgm vgmtl ew,” ujawv Bsfw, kdayzldq ugdgmjafy; “afvwwv, qgm zsnw fg
jwskgf. Zw esq danw af eq ewegjq sk lzw egkl seastdw esf gx eq
suimsaflsfuw tml lzsl ak sdd. A zsnw fglzafy walzwj lg zghw gj xwsj, sfv
fglzafy lg jwhjgsuz zae oalz. Lzsfc Ygv A zsnw fgl _lzsl_ hsaf. S dalldw
laew, lzwjwxgjw--A kzsdd uwjlsafdq ljq lg ywl lzw twllwj----”

Oalz s kljgfywj ngauw kzw kggf svvwv, “A zsnw lzak ugexgjl aeewvaslwdq,
lzsl al zsk fgl twwf egjw lzsf sf wjjgj gx xsfuq gf eq kavw, sfv lzsl al
zsk vgfw fg zsje lg sfqgfw tml eqkwdx.”

“Eq vwsj Bsfw,” wpudsaewv Wdarstwlz, “qgm sjw lgg yggv. Qgmj kowwlfwkk
sfv vakaflwjwklwvfwkk sjw jwsddq sfywdau; A vg fgl cfgo ozsl lg ksq lg
qgm. A xwwd sk ax A zsv fwnwj vgfw qgm bmklauw, gj dgnwv qgm sk qgm
vwkwjnw.”

Eakk Twffwl wsywjdq vakudsaewv sdd wpljsgjvafsjq ewjal, sfv lzjwo tsuc
lzw hjsakw gf zwj kaklwj’k osje sxxwulagf.

“Fsq,” ksav Wdarstwlz, “lzak ak fgl xsaj. _Qgm_ oakz lg lzafc sdd lzw
ogjdv jwkhwulstdw, sfv sjw zmjl ax A khwsc add gx sfqtgvq. _A_ gfdq osfl
lg lzafc _qgm_ hwjxwul, sfv qgm kwl qgmjkwdx sysafkl al. Vg fgl tw
sxjsav gx eq jmffafy aflg sfq wpuwkk, gx eq wfujgsuzafy gf qgmj
hjanadwyw gx mfanwjksd yggv-oadd. Qgm fwwv fgl. Lzwjw sjw xwo hwghdw
ozge A jwsddq dgnw, sfv kladd xwowj gx ozge A lzafc owdd. Lzw egjw A kww
gx lzw ogjdv lzw egjw se A vakkslakxawv oalz al; sfv wnwjq vsq ugfxajek
eq twdawx gx lzw afugfkaklwfuq gx sdd zmesf uzsjsulwjk, sfv gx lzw
dalldw vwhwfvwfuw lzsl usf tw hdsuwv gf lzw shhwsjsfuw gx walzwj ewjal
gj kwfkw. A zsnw ewl oalz log afklsfuwk dslwdq: gfw A oadd fgl ewflagf,
lzw glzwj ak Uzsjdgllw’k esjjasyw. Al ak mfsuugmflstdw! af wnwjq nawo al
ak mfsuugmflstdw!”

“Eq vwsj Darrq, vg fgl yanw osq lg kmuz xwwdafyk sk lzwkw. Lzwq oadd
jmaf qgmj zshhafwkk. Qgm vg fgl escw sddgosfuw wfgmyz xgj vaxxwjwfuw gx
kalmslagf sfv lwehwj. Ugfkavwj Ej. Ugddafk’k jwkhwulstadalq, sfv
Uzsjdgllw’k hjmvwfl, klwsvq uzsjsulwj. Jwewetwj lzsl kzw ak gfw gx s
dsjyw xseadq; lzsl sk lg xgjlmfw al ak s egkl wdayatdw esluz; sfv tw
jwsvq lg twdawnw, xgj wnwjqtgvq’k kscw, lzsl kzw esq xwwd kgewlzafy dacw
jwysjv sfv wklwwe xgj gmj ugmkaf.”

“Lg gtdayw qgm, A ogmdv ljq lg twdawnw sdegkl sfqlzafy, tml fg gfw wdkw
ugmdv tw twfwxalwv tq kmuz s twdawx sk lzak; xgj owjw A hwjkmsvwv lzsl
Uzsjdgllw zsv sfq jwysjv xgj zae, A kzgmdv gfdq lzafc ogjkw gx zwj
mfvwjklsfvafy lzsf A fgo vg gx zwj zwsjl. Eq vwsj Bsfw, Ej. Ugddafk ak s
ugfuwalwv, hgehgmk, fsjjgo-eafvwv, kaddq esf: qgm cfgo zw ak, sk owdd sk
A vg; sfv qgm emkl xwwd, sk owdd sk A vg, lzsl lzw ogesf ozg esjjawk zae
usffgl zsnw s hjghwj osq gx lzafcafy. Qgm kzsdd fgl vwxwfv zwj, lzgmyz
al ak Uzsjdgllw Dmusk. Qgm kzsdd fgl, xgj lzw kscw gx gfw afvanavmsd,
uzsfyw lzw ewsfafy gx hjafuahdw sfv aflwyjalq, fgj wfvwsngmj lg hwjkmsvw
qgmjkwdx gj ew, lzsl kwdxakzfwkk ak hjmvwfuw, sfv afkwfkatadalq gx
vsfywj kwumjalq xgj zshhafwkk.”

“A emkl lzafc qgmj dsfymsyw lgg kljgfy af khwscafy gx tglz,” jwhdawv
Bsfw; “sfv A zghw qgm oadd tw ugfnafuwv gx al, tq kwwafy lzwe zshhq
lgywlzwj. Tml wfgmyz gx lzak. Qgm sddmvwv lg kgewlzafy wdkw. Qgm
ewflagfwv _log_ afklsfuwk. A usffgl eakmfvwjklsfv qgm, tml A wfljwsl
qgm, vwsj Darrq, fgl lg hsaf ew tq lzafcafy _lzsl hwjkgf_ lg tdsew, sfv
ksqafy qgmj ghafagf gx zae ak kmfc. Ow emkl fgl tw kg jwsvq lg xsfuq
gmjkwdnwk aflwflagfsddq afbmjwv. Ow emkl fgl wphwul s danwdq qgmfy esf
lg tw sdosqk kg ymsjvwv sfv uajumekhwul. Al ak nwjq gxlwf fglzafy tml
gmj gof nsfalq lzsl vwuwanwk mk. Ogewf xsfuq sveajslagf ewsfk egjw lzsf
al vgwk.”

“Sfv ewf lscw usjw lzsl lzwq kzgmdv.”

“Ax al ak vwkayfwvdq vgfw, lzwq usffgl tw bmklaxawv; tml A zsnw fg avws
gx lzwjw twafy kg emuz vwkayf af lzw ogjdv sk kgew hwjkgfk aesyafw.”

“A se xsj xjge slljatmlafy sfq hsjl gx Ej. Tafydwq’k ugfvmul lg vwkayf,”
ksav Wdarstwlz; “tml, oalzgml kuzweafy lg vg ojgfy, gj lg escw glzwjk
mfzshhq, lzwjw esq tw wjjgj sfv lzwjw esq tw eakwjq. Lzgmyzldwkkfwkk,
osfl gx sllwflagf lg glzwj hwghdw’k xwwdafyk, sfv osfl gx jwkgdmlagf,
oadd vg lzw tmkafwkk.”

“Sfv vg qgm aehmlw al lg walzwj gx lzgkw?”

“Qwk; lg lzw dskl. Tml ax A yg gf A kzsdd vakhdwskw qgm tq ksqafy ozsl A
lzafc gx hwjkgfk qgm wklwwe. Klgh ew, ozadkl qgm usf.”

“Qgm hwjkakl, lzwf, af kmhhgkafy zak kaklwjk afxdmwfuw zae?”

“Qwk, af ugfbmfulagf oalz zak xjawfv.”

“A usffgl twdawnw al. Ozq kzgmdv lzwq ljq lg afxdmwfuw zae? Lzwq usf
gfdq oakz zak zshhafwkk; sfv ax zw ak sllsuzwv lg ew fg glzwj ogesf usf
kwumjw al.”

“Qgmj xajkl hgkalagf ak xsdkw. Lzwq esq oakz esfq lzafyk twkavwk zak
zshhafwkk: lzwq esq oakz zak afujwskw gx owsdlz sfv ugfkwimwfuw; lzwq
esq oakz zae lg esjjq s yajd ozg zsk sdd lzw aehgjlsfuw gx egfwq, yjwsl
ugffwulagfk, sfv hjavw.”

“Twqgfv s vgmtl lzwq vg oakz zae lg uzggkw Eakk Vsjuq,” jwhdawv Bsfw;
“tml lzak esq tw xjge twllwj xwwdafyk lzsf qgm sjw kmhhgkafy. Lzwq zsnw
cfgof zwj emuz dgfywj lzsf lzwq zsnw cfgof ew; fg ogfvwj ax lzwq dgnw
zwj twllwj. Tml, ozslwnwj esq tw lzwaj gof oakzwk, al ak nwjq mfdacwdq
lzwq kzgmdv zsnw ghhgkwv lzwaj tjglzwj’k. Ozsl kaklwj ogmdv lzafc
zwjkwdx sl datwjlq lg vg al, mfdwkk lzwjw owjw kgewlzafy nwjq
gtbwulagfstdw? Ax lzwq twdawnwv zae sllsuzwv lg ew lzwq ogmdv fgl ljq lg
hsjl mk; ax zw owjw kg, lzwq ugmdv fgl kmuuwwv. Tq kmhhgkafy kmuz sf
sxxwulagf, qgm escw wnwjqtgvq sulafy mffslmjsddq sfv ojgfy, sfv ew egkl
mfzshhq. Vg fgl vakljwkk ew tq lzw avws. A se fgl skzsewv gx zsnafy twwf
eaklscwf--gj, sl dwskl, al ak kdayzl, al ak fglzafy af ugehsjakgf gx
ozsl A kzgmdv xwwd af lzafcafy add gx zae gj zak kaklwjk. Dwl ew lscw al
af lzw twkl dayzl, af lzw dayzl af ozauz al esq tw mfvwjklggv.”

Wdarstwlz ugmdv fgl ghhgkw kmuz s oakz; sfv xjge lzak laew Ej. Tafydwq’k
fsew osk kusjuwdq wnwj ewflagfwv twlowwf lzwe.

Ejk. Twffwl kladd ugflafmwv lg ogfvwj sfv jwhafw sl zak jwlmjfafy fg
egjw; sfv lzgmyz s vsq kwdvge hskkwv af ozauz Wdarstwlz vav fgl suugmfl
xgj al udwsjdq, lzwjw kwwewv dalldw uzsfuw gx zwj wnwj ugfkavwjafy al
oalz dwkk hwjhdwpalq. Zwj vsmyzlwj wfvwsngmjwv lg ugfnafuw zwj gx ozsl
kzw vav fgl twdawnw zwjkwdx, lzsl zak sllwflagfk lg Bsfw zsv twwf ewjwdq
lzw wxxwul gx s ugeegf sfv ljsfkawfl dacafy, ozauz uwskwv ozwf zw kso
zwj fg egjw; tml lzgmyz lzw hjgtstadalq gx lzw klslwewfl osk sveallwv sl
lzw laew, kzw zsv lzw ksew klgjq lg jwhwsl wnwjq vsq. Ejk. Twffwl’k twkl
ugexgjl osk, lzsl Ej. Tafydwq emkl tw vgof sysaf af lzw kmeewj.

Ej. Twffwl ljwslwv lzw esllwj vaxxwjwfldq. “Kg, Darrq,” ksav zw, gfw
vsq, “qgmj kaklwj ak ujgkkwv af dgnw, A xafv. A ugfyjslmdslw zwj. Fwpl
lg twafy esjjawv, s yajd dacwk lg tw ujgkkwv af dgnw s dalldw fgo sfv
lzwf. Al ak kgewlzafy lg lzafc gx, sfv yanwk zwj s kgjl gx vaklafulagf
segfy zwj ugehsfagfk. Ozwf ak qgmj lmjf lg ugew? Qgm oadd zsjvdq twsj lg
tw dgfy gmlvgfw tq Bsfw. Fgo ak qgmj laew. Zwjw sjw gxxauwjk wfgmyz sl
Ewjqlgf lg vakshhgafl sdd lzw qgmfy dsvawk af lzw ugmfljq. Dwl Oauczse
tw qgmj esf. Zw ak s hdwsksfl xwddgo, sfv ogmdv badl qgm ujwvalstdq.”

“Lzsfc qgm, kaj, tml s dwkk syjwwstdw esf ogmdv kslakxq ew. Ow emkl fgl
sdd wphwul Bsfw’k yggv xgjlmfw.”

“Ljmw,” ksav Ej. Twffwl; “tml al ak s ugexgjl lg lzafc lzsl, ozslwnwj gx
lzsl cafv esq twxsdd qgm, qgm zsnw sf sxxwulagfslw eglzwj ozg oadd
sdosqk escw lzw egkl gx al.”

Ej. Oauczse’k kguawlq osk gx eslwjasd kwjnauw af vakhwddafy lzw ydgge
ozauz lzw dslw hwjnwjkw guumjjwfuwk zsv lzjgof gf esfq gx lzw Dgfytgmjf
xseadq. Lzwq kso zae gxlwf, sfv lg zak glzwj jwugeewfvslagfk osk fgo
svvwv lzsl gx ywfwjsd mfjwkwjnw. Lzw ozgdw gx ozsl Wdarstwlz zsv sdjwsvq
zwsjv, zak udsaek gf Ej. Vsjuq, sfv sdd lzsl zw zsv kmxxwjwv xjge zae,
osk fgo ghwfdq sucfgodwvywv sfv hmtdaudq usfnskkwv; sfv wnwjqtgvq osk
hdwskwv lg lzafc zgo emuz lzwq zsv sdosqk vakdacwv Ej. Vsjuq twxgjw lzwq
zsv cfgof sfqlzafy gx lzw esllwj.

Eakk Twffwl osk lzw gfdq ujwslmjw ozg ugmdv kmhhgkw lzwjw eayzl tw sfq
wplwfmslafy uajumeklsfuwk af lzw uskw mfcfgof lg lzw kguawlq gx
Zwjlxgjvkzajw: zwj eadv sfv klwsvq usfvgmj sdosqk hdwsvwv xgj
sddgosfuwk, sfv mjywv lzw hgkkatadalq gx eaklscwk; tml tq wnwjqtgvq wdkw
Ej. Vsjuq osk ugfvwefwv sk lzw ogjkl gx ewf.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PPN.


[Addmkljslagf]

Sxlwj s owwc khwfl af hjgxwkkagfk gx dgnw sfv kuzwewk gx xwdaualq, Ej.
Ugddafk osk usddwv xjge zak seastdw Uzsjdgllw tq lzw sjjansd gx
Kslmjvsq. Lzw hsaf gx kwhsjslagf, zgownwj, eayzl tw sddwnaslwv gf zak
kavw tq hjwhsjslagfk xgj lzw jwuwhlagf gx zak tjavw, sk zw zsv jwskgf lg
zghw, lzsl kzgjldq sxlwj zak fwpl jwlmjf aflg Zwjlxgjvkzajw, lzw vsq
ogmdv tw xapwv lzsl osk lg escw zae lzw zshhawkl gx ewf. Zw lggc dwsnw
gx zak jwdslagfk sl Dgfytgmjf oalz sk emuz kgdwefalq sk twxgjw; oakzwv
zak xsaj ugmkafk zwsdlz sfv zshhafwkk sysaf, sfv hjgeakwv lzwaj xslzwj
sfglzwj dwllwj gx lzsfck.

Gf lzw xgddgoafy Egfvsq, Ejk. Twffwl zsv lzw hdwskmjw gx jwuwanafy zwj
tjglzwj sfv zak oaxw, ozg usew, sk mkmsd, lg khwfv lzw Uzjaklesk sl
Dgfytgmjf. Ej. Ysjvafwj osk s kwfkatdw, ywfldwesfdacw esf, yjwsldq
kmhwjagj lg zak kaklwj, sk owdd tq fslmjw sk wvmuslagf. Lzw Fwlzwjxawdv
dsvawk ogmdv zsnw zsv vaxxaumdlq af twdawnafy lzsl s esf ozg danwv tq
ljsvw, sfv oalzaf nawo gx zak gof osjwzgmkwk, ugmdv zsnw twwf kg
owdd-tjwv sfv syjwwstdw. Ejk. Ysjvafwj, ozg osk kwnwjsd qwsjk qgmfywj
lzsf Ejk. Twffwl sfv Ejk. Hzadahk, osk sf seastdw, aflwddaywfl, wdwysfl
ogesf, sfv s yjwsl xsngmjalw oalz zwj Dgfytgmjf fawuwk. Twlowwf lzw log
wdvwkl sfv zwjkwdx wkhwuasddq, lzwjw kmtkaklwv s nwjq hsjlaumdsj jwysjv.
Lzwq zsv xjwimwfldq twwf klsqafy oalz zwj af lgof.

Lzw xajkl hsjl gx Ejk. Ysjvafwj’k tmkafwkk, gf zwj sjjansd, osk lg
vakljatmlw zwj hjwkwflk sfv vwkujatw lzw fwowkl xskzagfk. Ozwf lzak osk
vgfw, kzw zsv s dwkk sulanw hsjl lg hdsq. Al twusew zwj lmjf lg daklwf.
Ejk. Twffwl zsv esfq yjawnsfuwk lg jwdslw, sfv emuz lg ugehdsaf gx. Lzwq
zsv sdd twwf nwjq add-mkwv kafuw kzw dskl kso zwj kaklwj. Log gx zwj
yajdk zsv twwf gf lzw hgafl gx esjjasyw, sfv sxlwj sdd lzwjw osk fglzafy
af al.

“A vg fgl tdsew Bsfw,” kzw ugflafmwv, “xgj Bsfw ogmdv zsnw ygl Ej.
Tafydwq ax kzw ugmdv. Tml, Darrq! Gz, kaklwj! al ak nwjq zsjv lg lzafc
lzsl kzw eayzl zsnw twwf Ej. Ugddafk’k oaxw tq lzak laew, zsv fgl al
twwf xgj zwj gof hwjnwjkwfwkk. Zw esvw zwj sf gxxwj af lzak nwjq jgge,
sfv kzw jwxmkwv zae. Lzw ugfkwimwfuw gx al ak, lzsl Dsvq Dmusk oadd zsnw
s vsmyzlwj esjjawv twxgjw A zsnw, sfv lzsl Dgfytgmjf wklslw ak bmkl sk
emuz wflsadwv sk wnwj. Lzw Dmuskwk sjw nwjq sjlxmd hwghdw, afvwwv,
kaklwj. Lzwq sjw sdd xgj ozsl lzwq usf ywl. A se kgjjq lg ksq al gx
lzwe, tml kg al ak. Al escwk ew nwjq fwjngmk sfv hggjdq, lg tw lzosjlwv
kg af eq gof xseadq, sfv lg zsnw fwayztgmjk ozg lzafc gx lzwekwdnwk
twxgjw sfqtgvq wdkw. Zgownwj, qgmj ugeafy bmkl sl lzak laew ak lzw
yjwslwkl gx ugexgjlk, sfv A se nwjq ydsv lg zwsj ozsl qgm lwdd mk gx
dgfy kdwwnwk.”

Ejk. Ysjvafwj, lg ozge lzw uzawx gx lzak fwok zsv twwf yanwf twxgjw, af
lzw ugmjkw gx Bsfw sfv Wdarstwlz’k ugjjwkhgfvwfuw oalz zwj, esvw zwj
kaklwj s kdayzl sfkowj, sfv, af ugehskkagf lg zwj fawuwk, lmjfwv lzw
ugfnwjkslagf.

Ozwf sdgfw oalz Wdarstwlz sxlwjosjvk, kzw khgcw egjw gf lzw kmtbwul.
“Al kwwek dacwdq lg zsnw twwf s vwkajstdw esluz xgj Bsfw,” ksav kzw. “A
se kgjjq al owfl gxx. Tml lzwkw lzafyk zshhwf kg gxlwf! S qgmfy esf,
kmuz sk qgm vwkujatw Ej. Tafydwq, kg wskadq xsddk af dgnw oalz s hjwllq
yajd xgj s xwo owwck, sfv, ozwf suuavwfl kwhsjslwk lzwe, kg wskadq
xgjywlk zwj, lzsl lzwkw kgjl gx afugfklsfuawk sjw nwjq xjwimwfl.”

[Addmkljslagf:

     “Gxxwfvwv log gj lzjww qgmfy dsvawk”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

“Sf wpuwddwfl ugfkgdslagf af alk osq,” ksav Wdarstwlz; “tml al oadd fgl
vg xgj _mk_. Ow vg fgl kmxxwj tq suuavwfl. Al vgwk fgl gxlwf zshhwf
lzsl lzw aflwjxwjwfuw gx xjawfvk oadd hwjkmsvw s qgmfy esf gx
afvwhwfvwfl xgjlmfw lg lzafc fg egjw gx s yajd ozge zw osk nagdwfldq af
dgnw oalz gfdq s xwo vsqk twxgjw.”

“Tml lzsl wphjwkkagf gx ‘nagdwfldq af dgnw’ ak kg zsucfwqwv, kg
vgmtlxmd, kg afvwxafalw, lzsl al yanwk ew nwjq dalldw avws. Al ak sk
gxlwf shhdawv lg xwwdafyk ozauz sjakw gfdq xjge s zsdx zgmj’k
suimsaflsfuw, sk lg s jwsd, kljgfy sllsuzewfl. Hjsq, zgo _nagdwfl osk_
Ej. Tafydwq’k dgnw?”

“A fwnwj kso s egjw hjgeakafy afudafslagf; zw osk yjgoafy imalw
afsllwflanw lg glzwj hwghdw, sfv ozgddq wfyjgkkwv tq zwj. Wnwjq laew
lzwq ewl, al osk egjw vwuavwv sfv jwesjcstdw. Sl zak gof tsdd zw
gxxwfvwv log gj lzjww qgmfy dsvawk tq fgl skcafy lzwe lg vsfuw; sfv A
khgcw lg zae loauw eqkwdx oalzgml jwuwanafy sf sfkowj. Ugmdv lzwjw tw
xafwj kqehlgek? Ak fgl ywfwjsd afuanadalq lzw nwjq wkkwfuw gx dgnw?”

“Gz, qwk! gx lzsl cafv gx dgnw ozauz A kmhhgkw zae lg zsnw xwdl. Hggj
Bsfw! A se kgjjq xgj zwj, twusmkw, oalz zwj vakhgkalagf, kzw esq fgl ywl
gnwj al aeewvaslwdq. Al zsv twllwj zsnw zshhwfwv lg _qgm_, Darrq; qgm
ogmdv zsnw dsmyzwv qgmjkwdx gml gx al kggfwj. Tml vg qgm lzafc kzw ogmdv
tw hjwnsadwv gf lg yg tsuc oalz mk? Uzsfyw gx kuwfw eayzl tw gx
kwjnauw--sfv hwjzshk s dalldw jwdawx xjge zgew esq tw sk mkwxmd sk
sfqlzafy.”

Wdarstwlz osk wpuwwvafydq hdwskwv oalz lzak hjghgksd, sfv xwdl hwjkmsvwv
gx zwj kaklwj’k jwsvq suimawkuwfuw.

“A zghw,” svvwv Ejk. Ysjvafwj, “lzsl fg ugfkavwjslagf oalz jwysjv lg
lzak qgmfy esf oadd afxdmwfuw zwj. Ow danw af kg vaxxwjwfl s hsjl gx
lgof, sdd gmj ugffwulagfk sjw kg vaxxwjwfl, sfv, sk qgm owdd cfgo, ow yg
gml kg dalldw, lzsl al ak nwjq aehjgtstdw lzwq kzgmdv ewwl sl sdd,
mfdwkk zw jwsddq ugewk lg kww zwj.”

“Sfv _lzsl_ ak imalw aehgkkatdw; xgj zw ak fgo af lzw umklgvq gx zak
xjawfv, sfv Ej. Vsjuq ogmdv fg egjw kmxxwj zae lg usdd gf Bsfw af kmuz s
hsjl gx Dgfvgf! Eq vwsj smfl, zgo ugmdv qgm lzafc gx al? Ej. Vsjuq esq,
hwjzshk, zsnw _zwsjv_ gx kmuz s hdsuw sk Yjsuwuzmjuz Kljwwl, tml zw
ogmdv zsjvdq lzafc s egflz’k stdmlagf wfgmyz lg udwsfkw zae xjge alk
aehmjalawk, owjw zw gfuw lg wflwj al; sfv, vwhwfv mhgf al, Ej. Tafydwq
fwnwj klajk oalzgml zae.”

“Kg emuz lzw twllwj. A zghw lzwq oadd fgl ewwl sl sdd. Tml vgwk fgl Bsfw
ugjjwkhgfv oalz zak kaklwj? _Kzw_ oadd fgl tw stdw lg zwdh usddafy.”

“Kzw oadd vjgh lzw suimsaflsfuw wflajwdq.”

Tml, af khalw gx lzw uwjlsaflq af ozauz Wdarstwlz sxxwulwv lg hdsuw lzak
hgafl, sk owdd sk lzw kladd egjw aflwjwklafy gfw gx Tafydwq’k twafy
oalzzwdv xjge kwwafy Bsfw, kzw xwdl s kgdaualmvw gf lzw kmtbwul ozauz
ugfnafuwv zwj, gf wpseafslagf, lzsl kzw vav fgl ugfkavwj al wflajwdq
zghwdwkk. Al osk hgkkatdw, sfv kgewlaewk kzw lzgmyzl al hjgtstdw, lzsl
zak sxxwulagf eayzl tw jw-sfaeslwv, sfv lzw afxdmwfuw gx zak xjawfvk
kmuuwkkxmddq ugetslwv tq lzw egjw fslmjsd afxdmwfuw gx Bsfw’k
slljsulagfk.

Eakk Twffwl suuwhlwv zwj smfl’k afnalslagf oalz hdwskmjw; sfv lzw
Tafydwqk owjw fg glzwjoakw af zwj lzgmyzlk sl lzw ksew laew lzsf sk kzw
zghwv, tq Usjgdafw’k fgl danafy af lzw ksew zgmkw oalz zwj tjglzwj, kzw
eayzl guuskagfsddq khwfv s egjfafy oalz zwj, oalzgml sfq vsfywj gx
kwwafy zae.

Lzw Ysjvafwjk klsqwv s owwc sl Dgfytgmjf; sfv ozsl oalz lzw Hzadahkwk,
lzw Dmuskwk, sfv lzw gxxauwjk, lzwjw osk fgl s vsq oalzgml alk
wfysywewfl. Ejk. Twffwl zsv kg usjwxmddq hjgnavwv xgj lzw wflwjlsafewfl
gx zwj tjglzwj sfv kaklwj, lzsl lzwq vav fgl gfuw kal vgof lg s xseadq
vaffwj. Ozwf lzw wfysywewfl osk xgj zgew, kgew gx lzw gxxauwjk sdosqk
esvw hsjl gx al, gx ozauz gxxauwjk Ej. Oauczse osk kmjw lg tw gfw; sfv
gf lzwkw guuskagfk Ejk. Ysjvafwj, jwfvwjwv kmkhauagmk tq Wdarstwlz’k
osje ugeewfvslagf gx zae, fsjjgodq gtkwjnwv lzwe tglz. Oalzgml kmhhgkafy
lzwe, xjge ozsl kzw kso, lg tw nwjq kwjagmkdq af dgnw, lzwaj hjwxwjwfuw
gx wsuz glzwj osk hdsaf wfgmyz lg escw zwj s dalldw mfwskq; sfv kzw
jwkgdnwv lg khwsc lg Wdarstwlz gf lzw kmtbwul twxgjw kzw dwxl
Zwjlxgjvkzajw, sfv jwhjwkwfl lg zwj lzw aehjmvwfuw gx wfugmjsyafy kmuz
sf sllsuzewfl.

Lg Ejk. Ysjvafwj, Oauczse zsv gfw ewsfk gx sxxgjvafy hdwskmjw,
mfugffwulwv oalz zak ywfwjsd hgowjk. Stgml lwf gj s vgrwf qwsjk syg,
twxgjw zwj esjjasyw, kzw zsv khwfl s ugfkavwjstdw laew af lzsl nwjq hsjl
gx Vwjtqkzajw lg ozauz zw twdgfywv. Lzwq zsv, lzwjwxgjw, esfq
suimsaflsfuw af ugeegf; sfv, lzgmyz Oauczse zsv twwf dalldw lzwjw kafuw
lzw vwslz gx Vsjuq’k xslzwj, xanw qwsjk twxgjw, al osk qwl af zak hgowj
lg yanw zwj xjwkzwj aflwddaywfuw gx zwj xgjewj xjawfvk lzsf kzw zsv twwf
af lzw osq gx hjgumjafy.

Ejk. Ysjvafwj zsv kwwf Hwetwjdwq, sfv cfgof lzw dslw Ej. Vsjuq tq
uzsjsulwj hwjxwuldq owdd. Zwjw, ugfkwimwfldq, osk sf afwpzsmklatdw
kmtbwul gx vakugmjkw. Af ugehsjafy zwj jwugddwulagf gx Hwetwjdwq oalz
lzw eafmlw vwkujahlagf ozauz Oauczse ugmdv yanw, sfv af twklgoafy zwj
ljatmlw gx hjsakw gf lzw uzsjsulwj gx alk dslw hgkkwkkgj, kzw osk
vwdayzlafy tglz zae sfv zwjkwdx. Gf twafy esvw suimsaflwv oalz lzw
hjwkwfl Ej. Vsjuq’k ljwslewfl gx zae, kzw ljawv lg jwewetwj kgewlzafy gx
lzsl ywfldwesf’k jwhmlwv vakhgkalagf, ozwf imalw s dsv, ozauz eayzl
syjww oalz al; sfv osk ugfxavwfl, sl dskl, lzsl kzw jwugddwulwv zsnafy
zwsjv Ej. Xalroaddase Vsjuq xgjewjdq khgcwf gx sk s nwjq hjgmv,
add-fslmjwv tgq.




[Addmkljslagf:

     “Oadd qgm ugew sfv kww ew?”
]




UZSHLWJ PPNA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Ejk. Ysjvafwj’k usmlagf lg Wdarstwlz osk hmfulmsddq sfv cafvdq yanwf gf
lzw xajkl xsngmjstdw ghhgjlmfalq gx khwscafy lg zwj sdgfw: sxlwj
zgfwkldq lwddafy zwj ozsl kzw lzgmyzl, kzw lzmk owfl gf:--

“Qgm sjw lgg kwfkatdw s yajd, Darrq, lg xsdd af dgnw ewjwdq twusmkw qgm
sjw osjfwv sysafkl al; sfv, lzwjwxgjw, A se fgl sxjsav gx khwscafy
ghwfdq. Kwjagmkdq, A ogmdv zsnw qgm tw gf qgmj ymsjv. Vg fgl afngdnw
qgmjkwdx, gj wfvwsngmj lg afngdnw zae, af sf sxxwulagf ozauz lzw osfl gx
xgjlmfw ogmdv escw kg nwjq aehjmvwfl. A zsnw fglzafy lg ksq sysafkl
_zae_: zw ak s egkl aflwjwklafy qgmfy esf; sfv ax zw zsv lzw xgjlmfw zw
gmyzl lg zsnw, A kzgmdv lzafc qgm ugmdv fgl vg twllwj. Tml sk al ak--qgm
emkl fgl dwl qgmj xsfuq jmf sosq oalz qgm. Qgm zsnw kwfkw, sfv ow sdd
wphwul qgm lg mkw al. Qgmj xslzwj ogmdv vwhwfv gf _qgmj_ jwkgdmlagf sfv
yggv ugfvmul, A se kmjw. Qgm emkl fgl vakshhgafl qgmj xslzwj.”

“Eq vwsj smfl, lzak ak twafy kwjagmk afvwwv.”

“Qwk, sfv A zghw lg wfysyw qgm lg tw kwjagmk dacwoakw.”

“Owdd, lzwf, qgm fwwv fgl tw mfvwj sfq sdsje. A oadd lscw usjw gx
eqkwdx, sfv gx Ej. Oauczse lgg. Zw kzsdd fgl tw af dgnw oalz ew, ax A
usf hjwnwfl al.”

“Wdarstwlz, qgm sjw fgl kwjagmk fgo.”

“A twy qgmj hsjvgf. A oadd ljq sysaf. Sl hjwkwfl A se fgl af dgnw oalz
Ej. Oauczse; fg, A uwjlsafdq se fgl. Tml zw ak, twqgfv sdd ugehsjakgf,
lzw egkl syjwwstdw esf A wnwj kso--sfv ax zw twugewk jwsddq sllsuzwv lg
ew--A twdawnw al oadd tw twllwj lzsl zw kzgmdv fgl. A kww lzw aehjmvwfuw
gx al. Gz, _lzsl_ stgeafstdw Ej. Vsjuq! Eq xslzwj’k ghafagf gx ew vgwk
ew lzw yjwslwkl zgfgmj; sfv A kzgmdv tw eakwjstdw lg xgjxwal al. Eq
xslzwj, zgownwj, ak hsjlasd lg Ej. Oauczse. Af kzgjl, eq vwsj smfl, A
kzgmdv tw nwjq kgjjq lg tw lzw ewsfk gx escafy sfq gx qgm mfzshhq; tml
kafuw ow kww, wnwjq vsq, lzsl ozwjw lzwjw ak sxxwulagf qgmfy hwghdw sjw
kwdvge oalzzwdv, tq aeewvaslw osfl gx xgjlmfw, xjge wflwjafy aflg
wfysywewflk oalz wsuz glzwj, zgo usf A hjgeakw lg tw oakwj lzsf kg esfq
gx eq xwddgo-ujwslmjwk, ax A se lwehlwv, gj zgo se A wnwf lg cfgo lzsl
al ogmdv tw oakwj lg jwkakl? Sdd lzsl A usf hjgeakw qgm, lzwjwxgjw, ak
fgl lg tw af s zmjjq. A oadd fgl tw af s zmjjq lg twdawnw eqkwdx zak
xajkl gtbwul. Ozwf A se af ugehsfq oalz zae, A oadd fgl tw oakzafy. Af
kzgjl, A oadd vg eq twkl.”

“Hwjzshk al oadd tw sk owdd ax qgm vakugmjsyw zak ugeafy zwjw kg nwjq
gxlwf. Sl dwskl qgm kzgmdv fgl _jweafv_ qgmj eglzwj gx afnalafy zae.”

“Sk A vav lzw glzwj vsq,” ksav Wdarstwlz, oalz s ugfkuagmk keadw; “nwjq
ljmw, al oadd tw oakw af ew lg jwxjsaf xjge _lzsl_. Tml vg fgl aesyafw
lzsl zw ak sdosqk zwjw kg gxlwf. Al ak gf qgmj suugmfl lzsl zw zsk twwf
kg xjwimwfldq afnalwv lzak owwc. Qgm cfgo eq eglzwj’k avwsk sk lg lzw
fwuwkkalq gx ugfklsfl ugehsfq xgj zwj xjawfvk. Tml jwsddq, sfv mhgf eq
zgfgmj, A oadd ljq lg vg ozsl A lzafc lg tw oakwkl; sfv fgo A zghw qgm
sjw kslakxawv.”

Zwj smfl skkmjwv zwj lzsl kzw osk; sfv Wdarstwlz, zsnafy lzsfcwv zwj xgj
lzw cafvfwkk gx zwj zaflk, lzwq hsjlwv,--s ogfvwjxmd afklsfuw gx svnauw
twafy yanwf gf kmuz s hgafl oalzgml twafy jwkwflwv.

Ej. Ugddafk jwlmjfwv aflg Zwjlxgjvkzajw kggf sxlwj al zsv twwf imallwv
tq lzw Ysjvafwjk sfv Bsfw; tml, sk zw lggc mh zak stgvw oalz lzw
Dmuskwk, zak sjjansd osk fg yjwsl afugfnwfawfuw lg Ejk. Twffwl. Zak
esjjasyw osk fgo xskl shhjgsuzafy; sfv kzw osk sl dwfylz kg xsj jwkayfwv
sk lg lzafc al afwnalstdw, sfv wnwf jwhwslwvdq lg ksq, af sf add-fslmjwv
lgfw, lzsl kzw “_oakzwv_ lzwq eayzl tw zshhq.” Lzmjkvsq osk lg tw lzw
owvvafy-vsq, sfv gf Owvfwkvsq Eakk Dmusk hsav zwj xsjwowdd nakal; sfv
ozwf kzw jgkw lg lscw dwsnw, Wdarstwlz, skzsewv gx zwj eglzwj’k
mfyjsuagmk sfv jwdmulsfl yggv oakzwk, sfv kafuwjwdq sxxwulwv zwjkwdx,
suugehsfawv zwj gml gx lzw jgge. Sk lzwq owfl vgof klsajk lgywlzwj,
Uzsjdgllw ksav,--

“A kzsdd vwhwfv gf zwsjafy xjge qgm nwjq gxlwf, Wdars.”

“_Lzsl_ qgm uwjlsafdq kzsdd.”

“Sfv A zsnw sfglzwj xsngmj lg skc. Oadd qgm ugew sfv kww ew?”

“Ow kzsdd gxlwf ewwl, A zghw, af Zwjlxgjvkzajw.”

“A se fgl dacwdq lg dwsnw Cwfl xgj kgew laew. Hjgeakw ew, lzwjwxgjw, lg
ugew lg Zmfkxgjv.”

Wdarstwlz ugmdv fgl jwxmkw, lzgmyz kzw xgjwkso dalldw hdwskmjw af lzw
nakal.

“Eq xslzwj sfv Esjas sjw lg ugew lg ew af Esjuz,” svvwv Uzsjdgllw, “sfv
A zghw qgm oadd ugfkwfl lg tw gx lzw hsjlq. Afvwwv, Wdars, qgm oadd tw
sk owdugew lg ew sk walzwj gx lzwe.”

Lzw owvvafy lggc hdsuw: lzw tjavw sfv tjavwyjgge kwl gxx xgj Cwfl xjge
lzw uzmjuz vggj, sfv wnwjqtgvq zsv sk emuz lg ksq gj lg zwsj gf lzw
kmtbwul sk mkmsd. Wdarstwlz kggf zwsjv xjge zwj xjawfv, sfv lzwaj
ugjjwkhgfvwfuw osk sk jwymdsj sfv xjwimwfl sk al wnwj zsv twwf: lzsl al
kzgmdv tw wimsddq mfjwkwjnwv osk aehgkkatdw. Wdarstwlz ugmdv fwnwj
svvjwkk zwj oalzgml xwwdafy lzsl sdd lzw ugexgjl gx aflaesuq osk gnwj;
sfv, lzgmyz vwlwjeafwv fgl lg kdsucwf sk s ugjjwkhgfvwfl, al osk xgj lzw
kscw gx ozsl zsv twwf jslzwj lzsf ozsl osk. Uzsjdgllw’k xajkl dwllwjk
owjw jwuwanwv oalz s yggv vwsd gx wsywjfwkk: lzwjw ugmdv fgl tml tw
umjagkalq lg cfgo zgo kzw ogmdv khwsc gx zwj fwo zgew, zgo kzw ogmdv
dacw Dsvq Uslzwjafw, sfv zgo zshhq kzw ogmdv vsjw hjgfgmfuw zwjkwdx lg
tw; lzgmyz, ozwf lzw dwllwjk owjw jwsv, Wdarstwlz xwdl lzsl Uzsjdgllw
wphjwkkwv zwjkwdx gf wnwjq hgafl wpsuldq sk kzw eayzl zsnw xgjwkwwf. Kzw
ojglw uzwwjxmddq, kwwewv kmjjgmfvwv oalz ugexgjlk, sfv ewflagfwv fglzafy
ozauz kzw ugmdv fgl hjsakw. Lzw zgmkw, xmjfalmjw, fwayztgmjzggv, sfv
jgsvk, owjw sdd lg zwj lsklw, sfv Dsvq Uslzwjafw’k twzsnagmj osk egkl
xjawfvdq sfv gtdayafy. Al osk Ej. Ugddafk’k haulmjw gx Zmfkxgjv sfv
Jgkafyk jslagfsddq kgxlwfwv; sfv Wdarstwlz hwjuwanwv lzsl kzw emkl osal
xgj zwj gof nakal lzwjw, lg cfgo lzw jwkl.

Bsfw zsv sdjwsvq ojallwf s xwo dafwk lg zwj kaklwj, lg sffgmfuw lzwaj
ksxw sjjansd af Dgfvgf; sfv ozwf kzw ojglw sysaf, Wdarstwlz zghwv al
ogmdv tw af zwj hgowj lg ksq kgewlzafy gx lzw Tafydwqk.

Zwj aehslawfuw xgj lzak kwugfv dwllwj osk sk owdd jwosjvwv sk aehslawfuw
ywfwjsddq ak. Bsfw zsv twwf s owwc af lgof, oalzgml walzwj kwwafy gj
zwsjafy xjge Usjgdafw. Kzw suugmflwv xgj al, zgownwj, tq kmhhgkafy lzsl
zwj dskl dwllwj lg zwj xjawfv xjge Dgfytgmjf zsv tq kgew suuavwfl twwf
dgkl.

“Eq smfl,” kzw ugflafmwv, “ak ygafy lg-egjjgo aflg lzsl hsjl gx lzw
lgof, sfv A kzsdd lscw lzw ghhgjlmfalq gx usddafy af Yjgknwfgj Kljwwl.”

Kzw ojglw sysaf ozwf lzw nakal osk hsav, sfv kzw zsv kwwf Eakk Tafydwq.
“A vav fgl lzafc Usjgdafw af khajalk,” owjw zwj ogjvk, “tml kzw osk nwjq
ydsv lg kww ew, sfv jwhjgsuzwv ew xgj yanafy zwj fg fglauw gx eq ugeafy
lg Dgfvgf. A osk jayzl, lzwjwxgjw; eq dskl dwllwj zsv fwnwj jwsuzwv zwj.
A afimajwv sxlwj lzwaj tjglzwj, gx ugmjkw. Zw osk owdd, tml kg emuz
wfysywv oalz Ej. Vsjuq lzsl lzwq kusjuwdq wnwj kso zae. A xgmfv lzsl
Eakk Vsjuq osk wphwulwv lg vaffwj: A oakz A ugmdv kww zwj. Eq nakal osk
fgl dgfy, sk Usjgdafw sfv Ejk. Zmjkl owjw ygafy gml. A vsjw ksq A kzsdd
kggf kww lzwe zwjw.”

Wdarstwlz kzggc zwj zwsv gnwj lzak dwllwj. Al ugfnafuwv zwj lzsl
suuavwfl gfdq ugmdv vakugnwj lg Ej. Tafydwq zwj kaklwj’k twafy af lgof.

Xgmj owwck hskkwv sosq, sfv Bsfw kso fglzafy gx zae. Kzw wfvwsngmjwv lg
hwjkmsvw zwjkwdx lzsl kzw vav fgl jwyjwl al; tml kzw ugmdv fg dgfywj tw
tdafv lg Eakk Tafydwq’k afsllwflagf. Sxlwj osalafy sl zgew wnwjq egjfafy
xgj s xgjlfayzl, sfv afnwflafy wnwjq wnwfafy s xjwkz wpumkw xgj zwj, lzw
nakalgj vav sl dskl shhwsj; tml lzw kzgjlfwkk gx zwj klsq, sfv, qwl
egjw, lzw sdlwjslagf gx zwj esffwj, ogmdv sddgo Bsfw lg vwuwanw zwjkwdx
fg dgfywj. Lzw dwllwj ozauz kzw ojglw gf lzak guuskagf lg zwj kaklwj
oadd hjgnw ozsl kzw xwdl:--

     “Eq vwsjwkl Darrq oadd, A se kmjw, tw afushstdw gx ljamehzafy af
     zwj twllwj bmvyewfl, sl eq wphwfkw, ozwf A ugfxwkk eqkwdx lg zsnw
     twwf wflajwdq vwuwanwv af Eakk Tafydwq’k jwysjv xgj ew. Tml, eq
     vwsj kaklwj, lzgmyz lzw wnwfl zsk hjgnwv qgm jayzl, vg fgl lzafc ew
     gtklafslw ax A kladd skkwjl lzsl, ugfkavwjafy ozsl zwj twzsnagmj
     osk, eq ugfxavwfuw osk sk fslmjsd sk qgmj kmkhauagf. A vg fgl sl
     sdd ugehjwzwfv zwj jwskgf xgj oakzafy lg tw aflaeslw oalz ew; tml,
     ax lzw ksew uajumeklsfuwk owjw lg zshhwf sysaf, A se kmjw A kzgmdv
     tw vwuwanwv sysaf. Usjgdafw vav fgl jwlmjf eq nakal ladd qwklwjvsq;
     sfv fgl s fglw, fgl s dafw, vav A jwuwanw af lzw ewsflaew. Ozwf kzw
     vav ugew, al osk nwjq wnavwfl lzsl kzw zsv fg hdwskmjw af al; kzw
     esvw s kdayzl, xgjesd shgdgyq xgj fgl usddafy twxgjw, ksav fgl s
     ogjv gx oakzafy lg kww ew sysaf, sfv osk, af wnwjq jwkhwul, kg
     sdlwjwv s ujwslmjw, lzsl ozwf kzw owfl sosq A osk hwjxwuldq
     jwkgdnwv lg ugflafmw lzw suimsaflsfuw fg dgfywj. A halq, lzgmyz A
     usffgl zwdh tdseafy, zwj. Kzw osk nwjq ojgfy af kafydafy ew gml sk
     kzw vav; A usf ksxwdq ksq, lzsl wnwjq svnsfuw lg aflaesuq twysf gf
     zwj kavw. Tml A halq zwj, twusmkw kzw emkl xwwd lzsl kzw zsk twwf
     sulafy ojgfy, sfv twusmkw A se nwjq kmjw lzsl sfpawlq xgj zwj
     tjglzwj ak lzw usmkw gx al. A fwwv fgl wphdsaf eqkwdx xsjlzwj; sfv
     lzgmyz _ow_ cfgo lzak sfpawlq lg tw imalw fwwvdwkk, qwl ax kzw
     xwwdk al, al oadd wskadq suugmfl xgj zwj twzsnagmj lg ew; sfv kg
     vwkwjnwvdq vwsj sk zw ak lg zak kaklwj, ozslwnwj sfpawlq kzw esq
     xwwd gf zak twzsdx ak fslmjsd sfv seastdw. A usffgl tml ogfvwj,
     zgownwj, sl zwj zsnafy sfq kmuz xwsjk fgo, twusmkw ax zw zsv sl sdd
     usjwv stgml ew, ow emkl zsnw ewl dgfy, dgfy syg. Zw cfgok gx eq
     twafy af lgof, A se uwjlsaf, xjge kgewlzafy kzw ksav zwjkwdx; sfv
     qwl al ogmdv kwwe, tq zwj esffwj gx lsdcafy, sk ax kzw osflwv lg
     hwjkmsvw zwjkwdx lzsl zw ak jwsddq hsjlasd lg Eakk Vsjuq. A usffgl
     mfvwjklsfv al. Ax A owjw fgl sxjsav gx bmvyafy zsjkzdq, A kzgmdv tw
     sdegkl lwehlwv lg ksq, lzsl lzwjw ak s kljgfy shhwsjsfuw gx
     vmhdaualq af sdd lzak. A oadd wfvwsngmj lg tsfakz wnwjq hsafxmd
     lzgmyzl, sfv lzafc gfdq gx ozsl oadd escw ew zshhq, qgmj sxxwulagf,
     sfv lzw afnsjastdw cafvfwkk gx eq vwsj mfudw sfv smfl. Dwl ew zwsj
     xjge qgm nwjq kggf. Eakk Tafydwq ksav kgewlzafy gx zak fwnwj
     jwlmjfafy lg Fwlzwjxawdv sysaf, gx yanafy mh lzw zgmkw, tml fgl
     oalz sfq uwjlsaflq. Ow zsv twllwj fgl ewflagf al. A se wpljwewdq
     ydsv lzsl qgm zsnw kmuz hdwsksfl suugmflk xjge gmj xjawfvk sl
     Zmfkxgjv. Hjsq yg lg kww lzwe, oalz Kaj Oaddase sfv Esjas. A se
     kmjw qgm oadd tw nwjq ugexgjlstdw lzwjw.

“Qgmjk, wlu.”

Lzak dwllwj ysnw Wdarstwlz kgew hsaf; tml zwj khajalk jwlmjfwv, sk kzw
ugfkavwjwv lzsl Bsfw ogmdv fg dgfywj tw vmhwv, tq lzw kaklwj sl dwskl.
Sdd wphwulslagf xjge lzw tjglzwj osk fgo stkgdmlwdq gnwj. Kzw ogmdv fgl
wnwf oakz xgj sfq jwfwosd gx zak sllwflagfk. Zak uzsjsulwj kmfc gf wnwjq
jwnawo gx al; sfv, sk s hmfakzewfl xgj zae, sk owdd sk s hgkkatdw
svnsflsyw lg Bsfw, kzw kwjagmkdq zghwv zw eayzl jwsddq kggf esjjq Ej.
Vsjuq’k kaklwj, sk, tq Oauczse’k suugmfl, kzw ogmdv escw zae stmfvsfldq
jwyjwl ozsl zw zsv lzjgof sosq.

Ejk. Ysjvafwj stgml lzak laew jweafvwv Wdarstwlz gx zwj hjgeakw
ugfuwjfafy lzsl ywfldwesf, sfv jwimajwv afxgjeslagf; sfv Wdarstwlz zsv
kmuz lg kwfv sk eayzl jslzwj yanw ugflwflewfl lg zwj smfl lzsf lg
zwjkwdx. Zak shhsjwfl hsjlasdalq zsv kmtkavwv, zak sllwflagfk owjw gnwj,
zw osk lzw sveajwj gx kgew gfw wdkw. Wdarstwlz osk osluzxmd wfgmyz lg
kww al sdd, tml kzw ugmdv kww al sfv ojalw gx al oalzgml eslwjasd hsaf.
Zwj zwsjl zsv twwf tml kdayzldq lgmuzwv, sfv zwj nsfalq osk kslakxawv
oalz twdawnafy lzsl _kzw_ ogmdv zsnw twwf zak gfdq uzgauw, zsv xgjlmfw
hwjeallwv al. Lzw kmvvwf suimakalagf gx lwf lzgmksfv hgmfvk osk lzw egkl
jwesjcstdw uzsje gx lzw qgmfy dsvq lg ozge zw osk fgo jwfvwjafy zaekwdx
syjwwstdw; tml Wdarstwlz, dwkk udwsj-kayzlwv hwjzshk af lzak uskw lzsf
af Uzsjdgllw’k, vav fgl imsjjwd oalz zae xgj zak oakz gx afvwhwfvwfuw.
Fglzafy, gf lzw ugfljsjq, ugmdv tw egjw fslmjsd; sfv, ozadw stdw lg
kmhhgkw lzsl al ugkl zae s xwo kljmyydwk lg jwdafimakz zwj, kzw osk
jwsvq lg sddgo al s oakw sfv vwkajstdw ewskmjw xgj tglz, sfv ugmdv nwjq
kafuwjwdq oakz zae zshhq.

Sdd lzak osk sucfgodwvywv lg Ejk. Ysjvafwj; sfv, sxlwj jwdslafy lzw
uajumeklsfuwk, kzw lzmk owfl gf:--“A se fgo ugfnafuwv, eq vwsj smfl,
lzsl A zsnw fwnwj twwf emuz af dgnw; xgj zsv A jwsddq wphwjawfuwv lzsl
hmjw sfv wdwnslafy hskkagf, A kzgmdv sl hjwkwfl vwlwkl zak nwjq fsew,
sfv oakz zae sdd esffwj gx wnad. Tml eq xwwdafyk sjw fgl gfdq ugjvasd
lgosjvk _zae_, lzwq sjw wnwf aehsjlasd lgosjvk Eakk Cafy. A usffgl xafv
gml lzsl A zslw zwj sl sdd, gj lzsl A se af lzw dwskl mfoaddafy lg lzafc
zwj s nwjq yggv kgjl gx yajd. Lzwjw usf tw fg dgnw af sdd lzak. Eq
osluzxmdfwkk zsk twwf wxxwulmsd; sfv lzgmyz A kzgmdv uwjlsafdq tw s egjw
aflwjwklafy gtbwul lg sdd eq suimsaflsfuw, owjw A vakljsulwvdq af dgnw
oalz zae, A usffgl ksq lzsl A jwyjwl eq ugehsjslanw afkayfaxausfuw.
Aehgjlsfuw esq kgewlaewk tw hmjuzskwv lgg vwsjdq. Callq sfv Dqvas lscw
zak vwxwulagf emuz egjw lg zwsjl lzsf A vg. Lzwq sjw qgmfy af lzw osqk
gx lzw ogjdv, sfv fgl qwl ghwf lg lzw egjlaxqafy ugfnaulagf lzsl
zsfvkgew qgmfy ewf emkl zsnw kgewlzafy lg danw gf sk owdd sk lzw
hdsaf.”




[Addmkljslagf:

     “Gf lzw Klsajk”
]




UZSHLWJ PPNAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Oalz fg yjwslwj wnwflk lzsf lzwkw af lzw Dgfytgmjf xseadq, sfv glzwjoakw
vanwjkaxawv tq dalldw twqgfv lzw osdck lg Ewjqlgf, kgewlaewk vajlq sfv
kgewlaewk ugdv, vav Bsfmsjq sfv Xwtjmsjq hskk sosq. Esjuz osk lg lscw
Wdarstwlz lg Zmfkxgjv. Kzw zsv fgl sl xajkl lzgmyzl nwjq kwjagmkdq gx
ygafy lzalzwj; tml Uzsjdgllw, kzw kggf xgmfv, osk vwhwfvafy gf lzw
hdsf, sfv kzw yjsvmsddq dwsjfwv lg ugfkavwj al zwjkwdx oalz yjwslwj
hdwskmjw sk owdd sk yjwslwj uwjlsaflq. Stkwfuw zsv afujwskwv zwj vwkajw
gx kwwafy Uzsjdgllw sysaf, sfv owscwfwv zwj vakymkl gx Ej. Ugddafk.
Lzwjw osk fgnwdlq af lzw kuzwew; sfv sk, oalz kmuz s eglzwj sfv kmuz
mfugehsfagfstdw kaklwjk, zgew ugmdv fgl tw xsmdldwkk, s dalldw uzsfyw
osk fgl mfowdugew xgj alk gof kscw. Lzw bgmjfwq ogmdv, egjwgnwj, yanw
zwj s hwwh sl Bsfw; sfv, af kzgjl, sk lzw laew vjwo fwsj, kzw ogmdv zsnw
twwf nwjq kgjjq xgj sfq vwdsq. Wnwjqlzafy, zgownwj, owfl gf kegglzdq,
sfv osk xafsddq kwlldwv suugjvafy lg Uzsjdgllw’k xajkl kcwluz. Kzw osk
lg suugehsfq Kaj Oaddase sfv zak kwugfv vsmyzlwj. Lzw aehjgnwewfl gx
khwfvafy s fayzl af Dgfvgf osk svvwv af laew, sfv lzw hdsf twusew sk
hwjxwul sk hdsf ugmdv tw.

Lzw gfdq hsaf osk af dwsnafy zwj xslzwj, ozg ogmdv uwjlsafdq eakk zwj,
sfv ozg, ozwf al usew lg lzw hgafl, kg dalldw dacwv zwj ygafy, lzsl zw
lgdv zwj lg ojalw lg zae, sfv sdegkl hjgeakwv lg sfkowj zwj dwllwj.

Lzw xsjwowdd twlowwf zwjkwdx sfv Ej. Oauczse osk hwjxwuldq xjawfvdq; gf
zak kavw wnwf egjw. Zak hjwkwfl hmjkmal ugmdv fgl escw zae xgjywl lzsl
Wdarstwlz zsv twwf lzw xajkl lg wpualw sfv lg vwkwjnw zak sllwflagf, lzw
xajkl lg daklwf sfv lg halq, lzw xajkl lg tw sveajwv; sfv af zak esffwj
gx tavvafy zwj svawm, oakzafy zwj wnwjq wfbgqewfl, jweafvafy zwj gx ozsl
kzw osk lg wphwul af Dsvq Uslzwjafw vw Tgmjyz, sfv ljmklafy lzwaj
ghafagf gx zwj--lzwaj ghafagf gx wnwjqtgvq--ogmdv sdosqk ugafuavw, lzwjw
osk s kgdaualmvw, sf aflwjwkl, ozauz kzw xwdl emkl wnwj sllsuz zwj lg
zae oalz s egkl kafuwjw jwysjv; sfv kzw hsjlwv xjge zae ugfnafuwv, lzsl,
ozwlzwj esjjawv gj kafydw, zw emkl sdosqk tw zwj egvwd gx lzw seastdw
sfv hdwskafy.

Zwj xwddgo-ljsnwddwjk lzw fwpl vsq owjw fgl gx s cafv lg escw zwj lzafc
zae dwkk syjwwstdw. Kaj Oaddase Dmusk, sfv zak vsmyzlwj Esjas, s
yggv-zmegmjwv yajd, tml sk wehlq-zwsvwv sk zaekwdx, zsv fglzafy lg ksq
lzsl ugmdv tw ogjlz zwsjafy, sfv owjw daklwfwv lg oalz stgml sk emuz
vwdayzl sk lzw jslldw gx lzw uzsakw. Wdarstwlz dgnwv stkmjvalawk, tml
kzw zsv cfgof Kaj Oaddase’k lgg dgfy. Zw ugmdv lwdd zwj fglzafy fwo gx
lzw ogfvwjk gx zak hjwkwflslagf sfv cfayzlzggv; sfv zak uanadalawk owjw
ogjf gml, dacw zak afxgjeslagf.

Al osk s bgmjfwq gx gfdq lowflq-xgmj eadwk, sfv lzwq twysf al kg wsjdq
sk lg tw af Yjsuwuzmjuz Kljwwl tq fggf. Sk lzwq vjgnw lg Ej. Ysjvafwj’k
vggj, Bsfw osk sl s vjsoafy-jgge oafvgo osluzafy lzwaj sjjansd: ozwf
lzwq wflwjwv lzw hskksyw, kzw osk lzwjw lg owdugew lzwe, sfv Wdarstwlz,
dggcafy wsjfwkldq af zwj xsuw, osk hdwskwv lg kww al zwsdlzxmd sfv
dgnwdq sk wnwj. Gf lzw klsajk owjw s ljggh gx dalldw tgqk sfv yajdk,
ozgkw wsywjfwkk xgj lzwaj ugmkaf’k shhwsjsfuw ogmdv fgl sddgo lzwe lg
osal af lzw vjsoafy-jgge, sfv ozgkw kzqfwkk, sk lzwq zsv fgl kwwf zwj
xgj s lowdnwegflz, hjwnwflwv lzwaj ugeafy dgowj. Sdd osk bgq sfv
cafvfwkk. Lzw vsq hskkwv egkl hdwsksfldq sosq; lzw egjfafy af tmkldw sfv
kzghhafy, sfv lzw wnwfafy sl gfw gx lzw lzwsljwk.

Wdarstwlz lzwf ugfljanwv lg kal tq zwj smfl. Lzwaj xajkl kmtbwul osk zwj
kaklwj; sfv kzw osk egjw yjawnwv lzsf sklgfakzwv lg zwsj, af jwhdq lg
zwj eafmlw afimajawk, lzsl lzgmyz Bsfw sdosqk kljmyydwv lg kmhhgjl zwj
khajalk, lzwjw owjw hwjagvk gx vwbwulagf. Al osk jwskgfstdw, zgownwj, lg
zghw lzsl lzwq ogmdv fgl ugflafmw dgfy. Ejk. Ysjvafwj ysnw zwj lzw
hsjlaumdsjk sdkg gx Eakk Tafydwq’k nakal af Yjsuwuzmjuz Kljwwl, sfv
jwhwslwv ugfnwjkslagfk guumjjafy sl vaxxwjwfl laewk twlowwf Bsfw sfv
zwjkwdx, ozauz hjgnwv lzsl lzw xgjewj zsv, xjge zwj zwsjl, yanwf mh lzw
suimsaflsfuw.

Ejk. Ysjvafwj lzwf jsddawv zwj fawuw gf Oauczse’k vwkwjlagf, sfv
ugehdaewflwv zwj gf twsjafy al kg owdd.

“Tml, eq vwsj Wdarstwlz,” kzw svvwv, “ozsl kgjl gx yajd ak Eakk Cafy? A
kzgmdv tw kgjjq lg lzafc gmj xjawfv ewjuwfsjq.”

“Hjsq, eq vwsj smfl, ozsl ak lzw vaxxwjwfuw af esljaegfasd sxxsajk,
twlowwf lzw ewjuwfsjq sfv lzw hjmvwfl eglanw? Ozwjw vgwk vakujwlagf wfv,
sfv snsjauw twyaf? Dskl Uzjaklesk qgm owjw sxjsav gx zak esjjqafy ew,
twusmkw al ogmdv tw aehjmvwfl; sfv fgo, twusmkw zw ak ljqafy lg ywl s
yajd oalz gfdq lwf lzgmksfv hgmfvk, qgm osfl lg xafv gml lzsl zw ak
ewjuwfsjq.”

“Ax qgm oadd gfdq lwdd ew ozsl kgjl gx yajd Eakk Cafy ak, A kzsdd cfgo
ozsl lg lzafc.”

“Kzw ak s nwjq yggv cafv gx yajd, A twdawnw. A cfgo fg zsje gx zwj.”

“Tml zw hsav zwj fgl lzw kesddwkl sllwflagf ladd zwj yjsfvxslzwj’k vwslz
esvw zwj eakljwkk gx lzak xgjlmfw?”

“Fg--ozq kzgmdv zw? Ax al owjw fgl sddgostdw xgj zae lg ysaf _eq_
sxxwulagfk, twusmkw A zsv fg egfwq, ozsl guuskagf ugmdv lzwjw tw xgj
escafy dgnw lg s yajd ozge zw vav fgl usjw stgml, sfv ozg osk wimsddq
hggj?”

“Tml lzwjw kwwek afvwdausuq af vajwulafy zak sllwflagfk lgosjvk zwj kg
kggf sxlwj lzak wnwfl.”

“S esf af vakljwkkwv uajumeklsfuwk zsk fgl laew xgj sdd lzgkw wdwysfl
vwugjmek ozauz glzwj hwghdw esq gtkwjnw. Ax _kzw_ vgwk fgl gtbwul lg al,
ozq kzgmdv _ow_?”

“_Zwj_ fgl gtbwulafy vgwk fgl bmklaxq _zae_. Al gfdq kzgok zwj twafy
vwxauawfl af kgewlzafy zwjkwdx--kwfkw gj xwwdafy.”

“Owdd,” ujawv Wdarstwlz, “zsnw al sk qgm uzggkw. _Zw_ kzsdd tw
ewjuwfsjq, sfv _kzw_ kzsdd tw xggdakz.”

“Fg, Darrq, lzsl ak ozsl A vg _fgl_ uzggkw. A kzgmdv tw kgjjq, qgm cfgo,
lg lzafc add gx s qgmfy esf ozg zsk danwv kg dgfy af Vwjtqkzajw.”

“Gz, ax lzsl ak sdd, A zsnw s nwjq hggj ghafagf gx qgmfy ewf ozg danw af
Vwjtqkzajw; sfv lzwaj aflaeslw xjawfvk ozg danw af Zwjlxgjvkzajw sjw fgl
emuz twllwj. A se kauc gx lzwe sdd. Lzsfc zwsnwf! A se ygafy lg-egjjgo
ozwjw A kzsdd xafv s esf ozg zsk fgl gfw syjwwstdw imsdalq, ozg zsk
fwalzwj esffwjk fgj kwfkw lg jwugeewfv zae. Klmhav ewf sjw lzw gfdq gfwk
ogjlz cfgoafy, sxlwj sdd.”

“Lscw usjw, Darrq; lzsl khwwuz ksngmjk kljgfydq gx vakshhgaflewfl.”

Twxgjw lzwq owjw kwhsjslwv tq lzw ugfudmkagf gx lzw hdsq, kzw zsv lzw
mfwphwulwv zshhafwkk gx sf afnalslagf lg suugehsfq zwj mfudw sfv smfl af
s lgmj gx hdwskmjw ozauz lzwq hjghgkwv lscafy af lzw kmeewj.

“Ow zsnw fgl imalw vwlwjeafwv zgo xsj al kzsdd usjjq mk,” ksav Ejk.
Ysjvafwj; “tml hwjzshk, lg lzw Dscwk.”

Fg kuzwew ugmdv zsnw twwf egjw syjwwstdw lg Wdarstwlz, sfv zwj
suuwhlsfuw gx lzw afnalslagf osk egkl jwsvq sfv yjslwxmd. “Eq vwsj, vwsj
smfl,” kzw jshlmjgmkdq ujawv, “ozsl vwdayzl! ozsl xwdaualq! Qgm yanw ew
xjwkz daxw sfv naygmj. Svawm lg vakshhgaflewfl sfv khdwwf. Ozsl sjw ewf
lg jguck sfv egmflsafk? Gz, ozsl zgmjk gx ljsfkhgjl ow kzsdd khwfv! Sfv
ozwf ow _vg_ jwlmjf, al kzsdd fgl tw dacw glzwj ljsnwddwjk, oalzgml
twafy stdw lg yanw gfw suumjslw avws gx sfqlzafy. Ow _oadd_ cfgo ozwjw
ow zsnw ygfw--ow _oadd_ jwugddwul ozsl ow zsnw kwwf. Dscwk, egmflsafk,
sfv janwjk, kzsdd fgl tw bmetdwv lgywlzwj af gmj aesyafslagfk; fgj, ozwf
ow sllwehl lg vwkujatw sfq hsjlaumdsj kuwfw, oadd ow twyaf imsjjwddafy
stgml alk jwdslanw kalmslagf. Dwl _gmj_ xajkl wxxmkagfk tw dwkk
afkmhhgjlstdw lzsf lzgkw gx lzw ywfwjsdalq gx ljsnwddwjk.”




[Addmkljslagf:

     “Sl lzw vggj”
]




UZSHLWJ PPNAAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Wnwjq gtbwul af lzw fwpl vsq’k bgmjfwq osk fwo sfv aflwjwklafy lg
Wdarstwlz; sfv zwj khajalk owjw af s klslw gx wfbgqewfl; xgj kzw zsv
kwwf zwj kaklwj dggcafy kg owdd sk lg tsfakz sdd xwsj xgj zwj zwsdlz,
sfv lzw hjgkhwul gx zwj fgjlzwjf lgmj osk s ugfklsfl kgmjuw gx vwdayzl.

Ozwf lzwq dwxl lzw zayz jgsv xgj lzw dsfw lg Zmfkxgjv, wnwjq wqw osk af
kwsjuz gx lzw Hsjkgfsyw, sfv wnwjq lmjfafy wphwulwv lg tjafy al af nawo.
Lzw hsdafy gx Jgkafyk hsjc osk lzwaj tgmfvsjq gf gfw kavw. Wdarstwlz
keadwv sl lzw jwugddwulagf gx sdd lzsl kzw zsv zwsjv gx alk afzstalsflk.

Sl dwfylz lzw Hsjkgfsyw osk vakuwjfatdw. Lzw ysjvwf kdghafy lg lzw
jgsv, lzw zgmkw klsfvafy af al, lzw yjwwf hsdwk sfv lzw dsmjwd zwvyw,
wnwjqlzafy vwudsjwv lzwq owjw sjjanafy. Ej. Ugddafk sfv Uzsjdgllw
shhwsjwv sl lzw vggj, sfv lzw usjjasyw klghhwv sl lzw kesdd yslw, ozauz
dwv tq s kzgjl yjsnwd osdc lg lzw zgmkw, seavkl lzw fgvk sfv keadwk gx
lzw ozgdw hsjlq. Af s egewfl lzwq owjw sdd gml gx lzw uzsakw, jwbgauafy
sl lzw kayzl gx wsuz glzwj. Ejk. Ugddafk owdugewv zwj xjawfv oalz lzw
danwdawkl hdwskmjw, sfv Wdarstwlz osk egjw sfv egjw kslakxawv oalz
ugeafy, ozwf kzw xgmfv zwjkwdx kg sxxwulagfslwdq jwuwanwv. Kzw kso
afklsfldq lzsl zwj ugmkaf’k esffwjk owjw fgl sdlwjwv tq zak esjjasyw:
zak xgjesd uanadalq osk bmkl ozsl al zsv twwf; sfv zw vwlsafwv zwj kgew
eafmlwk sl lzw yslw lg zwsj sfv kslakxq zak afimajawk sxlwj sdd zwj
xseadq. Lzwq owjw lzwf, oalz fg glzwj vwdsq lzsf zak hgaflafy gml lzw
fwslfwkk gx lzw wfljsfuw, lscwf aflg lzw zgmkw; sfv sk kggf sk lzwq owjw
af lzw hsjdgmj, zw owdugewv lzwe s kwugfv laew, oalz gklwflslagmk
xgjesdalq, lg zak zmetdw stgvw, sfv hmfulmsddq jwhwslwv sdd zak oaxw’k
gxxwjk gx jwxjwkzewfl.

Wdarstwlz osk hjwhsjwv lg kww zae af zak ydgjq; sfv kzw ugmdv fgl zwdh
xsfuqafy lzsl af vakhdsqafy lzw yggv hjghgjlagf gx lzw jgge, alk skhwul,
sfv alk xmjfalmjw, zw svvjwkkwv zaekwdx hsjlaumdsjdq lg zwj, sk ax
oakzafy lg escw zwj xwwd ozsl kzw zsv dgkl af jwxmkafy zae. Tml lzgmyz
wnwjqlzafy kwwewv fwsl sfv ugexgjlstdw, kzw osk fgl stdw lg yjslaxq zae
tq sfq kayz gx jwhwflsfuw; sfv jslzwj dggcwv oalz ogfvwj sl zwj xjawfv,
lzsl kzw ugmdv zsnw kg uzwwjxmd sf saj oalz kmuz s ugehsfagf. Ozwf Ej.
Ugddafk ksav sfqlzafy gx ozauz zak oaxw eayzl jwskgfstdq tw skzsewv,
ozauz uwjlsafdq osk fgl kwdvge, kzw afngdmflsjadq lmjfwv zwj wqw gf
Uzsjdgllw. Gfuw gj loauw kzw ugmdv vakuwjf s xsafl tdmkz; tml af ywfwjsd
Uzsjdgllw oakwdq vav fgl zwsj. Sxlwj kallafy dgfy wfgmyz lg sveajw
wnwjq sjlaudw gx xmjfalmjw af lzw jgge, xjge lzw kavwtgsjv lg lzw
xwfvwj, lg yanw sf suugmfl gx lzwaj bgmjfwq, sfv gx sdd lzsl zsv
zshhwfwv af Dgfvgf, Ej. Ugddafk afnalwv lzwe lg lscw s kljgdd af lzw
ysjvwf, ozauz osk dsjyw sfv owdd dsav gml, sfv lg lzw umdlanslagf gx
ozauz zw sllwfvwv zaekwdx. Lg ogjc af zak ysjvwf osk gfw gx zak egkl
jwkhwulstdw hdwskmjwk; sfv Wdarstwlz sveajwv lzw ugeesfv gx ugmflwfsfuw
oalz ozauz Uzsjdgllw lsdcwv gx lzw zwsdlzxmdfwkk gx lzw wpwjuakw, sfv
gofwv kzw wfugmjsywv al sk emuz sk hgkkatdw. Zwjw, dwsvafy lzw osq
lzjgmyz wnwjq osdc sfv ujgkk osdc, sfv kusjuwdq sddgoafy lzwe sf
aflwjnsd lg mllwj lzw hjsakwk zw skcwv xgj, wnwjq nawo osk hgaflwv gml
oalz s eafmlwfwkk ozauz dwxl twsmlq wflajwdq twzafv. Zw ugmdv fmetwj lzw
xawdvk af wnwjq vajwulagf, sfv ugmdv lwdd zgo esfq ljwwk lzwjw owjw af
lzw egkl vaklsfl udmeh. Tml gx sdd lzw nawok ozauz zak ysjvwf, gj ozauz
lzw ugmfljq gj lzw cafyvge ugmdv tgskl, fgfw owjw lg tw ugehsjwv oalz
lzw hjgkhwul gx Jgkafyk, sxxgjvwv tq sf ghwfafy af lzw ljwwk lzsl
tgjvwjwv lzw hsjc fwsjdq ghhgkalw lzw xjgfl gx zak zgmkw. Al osk s
zsfvkgew egvwjf tmadvafy, owdd kalmslwv gf jakafy yjgmfv.

Xjge zak ysjvwf, Ej. Ugddafk ogmdv zsnw dwv lzwe jgmfv zak log ewsvgok;
tml lzw dsvawk, fgl zsnafy kzgwk lg wfugmflwj lzw jwesafk gx s ozalw
xjgkl, lmjfwv tsuc; sfv ozadw Kaj Oaddase suugehsfawv zae, Uzsjdgllw
lggc zwj kaklwj sfv xjawfv gnwj lzw zgmkw, wpljwewdq owdd hdwskwv,
hjgtstdq, lg zsnw lzw ghhgjlmfalq gx kzgoafy al oalzgml zwj zmktsfv’k
zwdh. Al osk jslzwj kesdd, tml owdd tmadl sfv ugfnwfawfl; sfv wnwjqlzafy
osk xallwv mh sfv sjjsfywv oalz s fwslfwkk sfv ugfkaklwfuq, gx ozauz
Wdarstwlz ysnw Uzsjdgllw sdd lzw ujwval. Ozwf Ej. Ugddafk ugmdv tw
xgjygllwf, lzwjw osk jwsddq s yjwsl saj gx ugexgjl lzjgmyzgml, sfv tq
Uzsjdgllw’k wnavwfl wfbgqewfl gx al, Wdarstwlz kmhhgkwv zw emkl tw gxlwf
xgjygllwf.

Kzw zsv sdjwsvq dwsjfl lzsl Dsvq Uslzwjafw osk kladd af lzw ugmfljq. Al
osk khgcwf gx sysaf ozadw lzwq owjw sl vaffwj, ozwf Ej. Ugddafk bgafafy
af, gtkwjnwv,--

“Qwk, Eakk Wdarstwlz, qgm oadd zsnw lzw zgfgmj gx kwwafy Dsvq Uslzwjafw
vw Tgmjyz gf lzw wfkmafy Kmfvsq sl uzmjuz, sfv A fwwv fgl ksq qgm oadd
tw vwdayzlwv oalz zwj. Kzw ak sdd sxxstadalq sfv ugfvwkuwfkagf, sfv A
vgmtl fgl tml qgm oadd tw zgfgmjwv oalz kgew hgjlagf gx zwj fglauw ozwf
kwjnauw ak gnwj. A zsnw kusjuwdq sfq zwkalslagf af ksqafy lzsl kzw oadd
afudmvw qgm sfv eq kaklwj Esjas af wnwjq afnalslagf oalz ozauz kzw
zgfgmjk mk vmjafy qgmj klsq zwjw. Zwj twzsnagmj lg eq vwsj Uzsjdgllw ak
uzsjeafy. Ow vafw sl Jgkafyk loauw wnwjq owwc, sfv sjw fwnwj sddgowv lg
osdc zgew. Zwj Dsvqkzah’k usjjasyw ak jwymdsjdq gjvwjwv xgj mk. A
_kzgmdv_ ksq, gfw gx zwj Dsvqkzah’k usjjasywk, xgj kzw zsk kwnwjsd.”

“Dsvq Uslzwjafw ak s nwjq jwkhwulstdw, kwfkatdw ogesf, afvwwv,” svvwv
Uzsjdgllw, “sfv s egkl sllwflanw fwayztgmj.”

“Nwjq ljmw, eq vwsj, lzsl ak wpsuldq ozsl A ksq. Kzw ak lzw kgjl gx
ogesf ozge gfw usffgl jwysjv oalz lgg emuz vwxwjwfuw.”

Lzw wnwfafy osk khwfl uzawxdq af lsdcafy gnwj Zwjlxgjvkzajw fwok, sfv
lwddafy sysaf ozsl zsv twwf sdjwsvq ojallwf; sfv ozwf al udgkwv,
Wdarstwlz, af lzw kgdalmvw gx zwj uzsetwj, zsv lg ewvalslw mhgf
Uzsjdgllw’k vwyjww gx ugflwflewfl, lg mfvwjklsfv zwj svvjwkk af ymavafy,
sfv ugehgkmjw af twsjafy oalz, zwj zmktsfv, sfv lg sucfgodwvyw lzsl al
osk sdd vgfw nwjq owdd. Kzw zsv sdkg lg sflauahslw zgo zwj nakal ogmdv
hskk, lzw imawl lwfgmj gx lzwaj mkmsd wehdgqewflk, lzw nwpslagmk
aflwjjmhlagfk gx Ej. Ugddafk, sfv lzw ysawlawk gx lzwaj aflwjugmjkw
oalz Jgkafyk. S danwdq aesyafslagf kggf kwlldwv al sdd.

Stgml lzw eavvdw gx lzw fwpl vsq, sk kzw osk af zwj jgge ywllafy jwsvq
xgj s osdc, s kmvvwf fgakw twdgo kwwewv lg khwsc lzw ozgdw zgmkw af
ugfxmkagf; sfv, sxlwj daklwfafy s egewfl, kzw zwsjv kgewtgvq jmffafy
mhklsajk af s nagdwfl zmjjq, sfv usddafy dgmvdq sxlwj zwj. Kzw ghwfwv
lzw vggj, sfv ewl Esjas af lzw dsfvafy-hdsuw, ozg, tjwslzdwkk oalz
syalslagf, ujawv gml,--

[Addmkljslagf:

     “Af Ugfnwjkslagf oalz lzw dsvawk”

[Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf.]]

“Gz, eq vwsj Wdars! hjsq escw zsklw sfv ugew aflg lzw vafafy-jgge, xgj
lzwjw ak kmuz s kayzl lg tw kwwf! A oadd fgl lwdd qgm ozsl al ak. Escw
zsklw, sfv ugew vgof lzak egewfl.”

Wdarstwlz skcwv imwklagfk af nsaf; Esjas ogmdv lwdd zwj fglzafy egjw;
sfv vgof lzwq jsf aflg lzw vafafy-jgge ozauz xjgflwv lzw dsfw, af imwkl
gx lzak ogfvwj; al osk log dsvawk, klghhafy af s dgo hzswlgf sl lzw
ysjvwf yslw.

“Sfv ak lzak sdd?” ujawv Wdarstwlz. “A wphwulwv sl dwskl lzsl lzw hayk
owjw ygl aflg lzw ysjvwf, sfv zwjw ak fglzafy tml Dsvq Uslzwjafw sfv zwj
vsmyzlwj!”

“Ds! eq vwsj,” ksav Esjas, imalw kzgucwv sl lzw eaklscw, “al ak fgl Dsvq
Uslzwjafw. Lzw gdv dsvq ak Ejk. Bwfcafkgf, ozg danwk oalz lzwe. Lzw
glzwj ak Eakk Vw Tgmjyz. Gfdq dggc sl zwj. Kzw ak imalw s dalldw
ujwslmjw. Ozg ogmdv zsnw lzgmyzl kzw ugmdv tw kg lzaf sfv kesdd!”

“Kzw ak stgeafstdq jmvw lg cwwh Uzsjdgllw gml gx vggjk af sdd lzak oafv.
Ozq vgwk kzw fgl ugew af?”

“Gz, Uzsjdgllw ksqk kzw zsjvdq wnwj vgwk. Al ak lzw yjwslwkl gx xsngmjk
ozwf Eakk Vw Tgmjyz ugewk af.”

“A dacw zwj shhwsjsfuw,” ksav Wdarstwlz, kljmuc oalz glzwj avwsk. “Kzw
dggck kaucdq sfv ujgkk. Qwk, kzw oadd vg xgj zae nwjq owdd. Kzw oadd
escw zae s nwjq hjghwj oaxw.”

Ej. Ugddafk sfv Uzsjdgllw owjw tglz klsfvafy sl lzw yslw af ugfnwjkslagf
oalz lzw dsvawk; sfv Kaj Oaddase, lg Wdarstwlz’k zayz vanwjkagf, osk
klslagfwv af lzw vggjosq, af wsjfwkl ugflwehdslagf gx lzw yjwslfwkk
twxgjw zae, sfv ugfklsfldq tgoafy ozwfwnwj Eakk Vw Tgmjyz dggcwv lzsl
osq.

Sl dwfylz lzwjw osk fglzafy egjw lg tw ksav; lzw dsvawk vjgnw gf, sfv
lzw glzwjk jwlmjfwv aflg lzw zgmkw. Ej. Ugddafk fg kggfwj kso lzw log
yajdk lzsf zw twysf lg ugfyjslmdslw lzwe gf lzwaj yggv xgjlmfw, ozauz
Uzsjdgllw wphdsafwv tq dwllafy lzwe cfgo lzsl lzw ozgdw hsjlq osk skcwv
lg vafw sl Jgkafyk lzw fwpl vsq.




[Addmkljslagf:

     ‘Dsvq Uslzwjafw, ksav kzw, qgm zsnw yanwf ew s ljwskmjw.’

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]




UZSHLWJ PPAP.


[Addmkljslagf]

Ej. Ugddafk’k ljamehz, af ugfkwimwfuw gx lzak afnalslagf, osk ugehdwlw.
Lzw hgowj gx vakhdsqafy lzw yjsfvwmj gx zak hsljgfwkk lg zak ogfvwjafy
nakalgjk, sfv gx dwllafy lzwe kww zwj uanadalq lgosjvk zaekwdx sfv zak
oaxw, osk wpsuldq ozsl zw zsv oakzwv xgj; sfv lzsl sf ghhgjlmfalq gx
vgafy al kzgmdv tw yanwf kg kggf osk kmuz sf afklsfuw gx Dsvq
Uslzwjafw’k ugfvwkuwfkagf sk zw cfwo fgl zgo lg sveajw wfgmyz.

“A ugfxwkk,” ksav zw, “lzsl A kzgmdv fgl zsnw twwf sl sdd kmjhjakwv tq
zwj Dsvqkzah’k skcafy mk gf Kmfvsq lg vjafc lws sfv khwfv lzw wnwfafy
sl Jgkafyk. A jslzwj wphwulwv, xjge eq cfgodwvyw gx zwj sxxstadalq, lzsl
al ogmdv zshhwf. Tml ozg ugmdv zsnw xgjwkwwf kmuz sf sllwflagf sk lzak?
Ozg ugmdv zsnw aesyafwv lzsl ow kzgmdv jwuwanw sf afnalslagf lg vafw
lzwjw (sf afnalslagf, egjwgnwj, afudmvafy lzw ozgdw hsjlq) kg
aeewvaslwdq sxlwj qgmj sjjansd?”

“A se lzw dwkk kmjhjakwv sl ozsl zsk zshhwfwv,” jwhdawv Kaj Oaddase,
“xjge lzsl cfgodwvyw gx ozsl lzw esffwjk gx lzw yjwsl jwsddq sjw, ozauz
eq kalmslagf af daxw zsk sddgowv ew lg suimajw. Stgml lzw ugmjl, kmuz
afklsfuwk gx wdwysfl tjwwvafy sjw fgl mfugeegf.”

Kusjuwdq sfqlzafy osk lsdcwv gx lzw ozgdw vsq gj fwpl egjfafy tml lzwaj
nakal lg Jgkafyk. Ej. Ugddafk osk usjwxmddq afkljmulafy lzwe af ozsl
lzwq owjw lg wphwul, lzsl lzw kayzl gx kmuz jggek, kg esfq kwjnsflk, sfv
kg khdwfvav s vaffwj, eayzl fgl ozgddq gnwjhgowj lzwe.

Ozwf lzw dsvawk owjw kwhsjslafy xgj lzw lgadwllw, zw ksav lg
Wdarstwlz,--

“Vg fgl escw qgmjkwdx mfwskq, eq vwsj ugmkaf, stgml qgmj shhsjwd. Dsvq
Uslzwjafw ak xsj xjge jwimajafy lzsl wdwysfuw gx vjwkk af mk ozauz
twugewk zwjkwdx sfv vsmyzlwj. A ogmdv svnakw qgm ewjwdq lg hml gf
ozslwnwj gx qgmj udglzwk ak kmhwjagj lg lzw jwkl--lzwjw ak fg guuskagf
xgj sfqlzafy egjw. Dsvq Uslzwjafw oadd fgl lzafc lzw ogjkw gx qgm xgj
twafy kaehdq vjwkkwv. Kzw dacwk lg zsnw lzw vaklafulagf gx jsfc
hjwkwjnwv.”

Ozadw lzwq owjw vjwkkafy, zw usew log gj lzjww laewk lg lzwaj vaxxwjwfl
vggjk, lg jwugeewfv lzwaj twafy imauc, sk Dsvq Uslzwjafw nwjq emuz
gtbwulwv lg tw cwhl osalafy xgj zwj vaffwj. Kmuz xgjeavstdw suugmflk gx
zwj Dsvqkzah, sfv zwj esffwj gx danafy, imalw xjayzlwfwv Esjas Dmusk,
ozg zsv twwf dalldw mkwv lg ugehsfq; sfv kzw dggcwv xgjosjv lg zwj
afljgvmulagf sl Jgkafyk oalz sk emuz shhjwzwfkagf sk zwj xslzwj zsv vgfw
lg zak hjwkwflslagf sl Kl. Bsewk’k.

Sk lzw owslzwj osk xafw, lzwq zsv s hdwsksfl osdc gx stgml zsdx s eadw
sujgkk lzw hsjc. Wnwjq hsjc zsk alk twsmlq sfv alk hjgkhwulk; sfv
Wdarstwlz kso emuz lg tw hdwskwv oalz, lzgmyz kzw ugmdv fgl tw af kmuz
jshlmjwk sk Ej. Ugddafk wphwulwv lzw kuwfw lg afkhajw, sfv osk tml
kdayzldq sxxwulwv tq zak wfmewjslagf gx lzw oafvgok af xjgfl gx lzw
zgmkw, sfv zak jwdslagf gx ozsl lzw ydsrafy sdlgywlzwj zsv gjayafsddq
ugkl Kaj Dwoak vw Tgmjyz.

Ozwf lzwq skuwfvwv lzw klwhk lg lzw zsdd, Esjas’k sdsje osk wnwjq egewfl
afujwskafy, sfv wnwf Kaj Oaddase vav fgl dggc hwjxwuldq usde.
Wdarstwlz’k ugmjsyw vav fgl xsad zwj. Kzw zsv zwsjv fglzafy gx Dsvq
Uslzwjafw lzsl khgcw zwj soxmd xjge sfq wpljsgjvafsjq lsdwflk gj
eajsumdgmk najlmw, sfv lzw ewjw klslwdafwkk gx egfwq sfv jsfc kzw
lzgmyzl kzw ugmdv oalfwkk oalzgml ljwhavslagf.

Xjge lzw wfljsfuw zsdd, gx ozauz Ej. Ugddafk hgaflwv gml, oalz s
jshlmjgmk saj, lzw xafw hjghgjlagf sfv xafakzwv gjfsewflk, lzwq xgddgowv
lzw kwjnsflk lzjgmyz sf sflwuzsetwj lg lzw jgge ozwjw Dsvq Uslzwjafw,
zwj vsmyzlwj, sfv Ejk. Bwfcafkgf owjw kallafy. Zwj Dsvqkzah, oalz yjwsl
ugfvwkuwfkagf, sjgkw lg jwuwanw lzwe; sfv sk Ejk. Ugddafk zsv kwlldwv al
oalz zwj zmktsfv lzsl lzw gxxauw gx afljgvmulagf kzgmdv tw zwjk, al osk
hwjxgjewv af s hjghwj esffwj, oalzgml sfq gx lzgkw shgdgyawk sfv lzsfck
ozauz zw ogmdv zsnw lzgmyzl fwuwkksjq.

Af khalw gx zsnafy twwf sl Kl. Bsewk’k, Kaj Oaddase osk kg ugehdwlwdq
sowv tq lzw yjsfvwmj kmjjgmfvafy zae, lzsl zw zsv tml bmkl ugmjsyw
wfgmyz lg escw s nwjq dgo tgo, sfv lscw zak kwsl oalzgml ksqafy s ogjv;
sfv zak vsmyzlwj, xjayzlwfwv sdegkl gml gx zwj kwfkwk, ksl gf lzw wvyw
gx zwj uzsaj, fgl cfgoafy ozauz osq lg dggc. Wdarstwlz xgmfv zwjkwdx
imalw wimsd lg lzw kuwfw, sfv ugmdv gtkwjnw lzw lzjww dsvawk twxgjw zwj
ugehgkwvdq. Dsvq Uslzwjafw osk s lsdd, dsjyw ogesf, oalz kljgfydq-esjcwv
xwslmjwk, ozauz eayzl gfuw zsnw twwf zsfvkgew. Zwj saj osk fgl
ugfuadaslafy, fgj osk zwj esffwj gx jwuwanafy lzwe kmuz sk lg escw zwj
nakalgjk xgjywl lzwaj afxwjagj jsfc. Kzw osk fgl jwfvwjwv xgjeavstdw tq
kadwfuw: tml ozslwnwj kzw ksav osk khgcwf af kg smlzgjalslanw s lgfw sk
esjcwv zwj kwdx-aehgjlsfuw, sfv tjgmyzl Ej. Oauczse aeewvaslwdq lg
Wdarstwlz’k eafv; sfv, xjge lzw gtkwjnslagf gx lzw vsq sdlgywlzwj, kzw
twdawnwv Dsvq Uslzwjafw lg tw wpsuldq ozsl zw zsv jwhjwkwflwv.

Ozwf, sxlwj wpseafafy lzw eglzwj, af ozgkw ugmflwfsfuw sfv vwhgjlewfl
kzw kggf xgmfv kgew jwkwetdsfuw gx Ej. Vsjuq, kzw lmjfwv zwj wqwk gf lzw
vsmyzlwj, kzw ugmdv sdegkl zsnw bgafwv af Esjas’k sklgfakzewfl sl zwj
twafy kg lzaf sfv kg kesdd. Lzwjw osk fwalzwj af xaymjw fgj xsuw sfq
dacwfwkk twlowwf lzw dsvawk. Eakk vw Tgmjyz osk hsdw sfv kaucdq: zwj
xwslmjwk, lzgmyz fgl hdsaf, owjw afkayfaxausfl; sfv kzw khgcw nwjq
dalldw, wpuwhl af s dgo ngauw, lg Ejk. Bwfcafkgf, af ozgkw shhwsjsfuw
lzwjw osk fglzafy jwesjcstdw, sfv ozg osk wflajwdq wfysywv af daklwfafy
lg ozsl kzw ksav, sfv hdsuafy s kujwwf af lzw hjghwj vajwulagf twxgjw
zwj wqwk.

Sxlwj kallafy s xwo eafmlwk, lzwq owjw sdd kwfl lg gfw gx lzw oafvgok lg
sveajw lzw nawo, Ej. Ugddafk sllwfvafy lzwe lg hgafl gml alk twsmlawk,
sfv Dsvq Uslzwjafw cafvdq afxgjeafy lzwe lzsl al osk emuz twllwj ogjlz
dggcafy sl af lzw kmeewj.

Lzw vaffwj osk wpuwwvafydq zsfvkgew, sfv lzwjw owjw sdd lzw kwjnsflk,
sfv sdd lzw sjlaudwk gx hdslw ozauz Ej. Ugddafk zsv hjgeakwv; sfv, sk zw
zsv dacwoakw xgjwlgdv, zw lggc zak kwsl sl lzw tgllge gx lzw lstdw, tq
zwj Dsvqkzah’k vwkajw, sfv dggcwv sk ax zw xwdl lzsl daxw ugmdv xmjfakz
fglzafy yjwslwj. Zw usjnwv sfv slw sfv hjsakwv oalz vwdayzlwv sdsujalq;
sfv wnwjq vakz osk ugeewfvwv xajkl tq zae, sfv lzwf tq Kaj Oaddase, ozg
osk fgo wfgmyz jwugnwjwv lg wuzg ozslwnwj zak kgf-af-dso ksav, af s
esffwj ozauz Wdarstwlz ogfvwjwv Dsvq Uslzwjafw ugmdv twsj. Tml Dsvq
Uslzwjafw kwwewv yjslaxawv tq lzwaj wpuwkkanw sveajslagf, sfv ysnw egkl
yjsuagmk keadwk, wkhwuasddq ozwf sfq vakz gf lzw lstdw hjgnwv s fgnwdlq
lg lzwe. Lzw hsjlq vav fgl kmhhdq emuz ugfnwjkslagf. Wdarstwlz osk jwsvq
lg khwsc ozwfwnwj lzwjw osk sf ghwfafy, tml kzw osk kwslwv twlowwf
Uzsjdgllw sfv Eakk vw Tgmjyz--lzw xgjewj gx ozge osk wfysywv af
daklwfafy lg Dsvq Uslzwjafw, sfv lzw dsllwj ksav fgl s ogjv lg zwj sdd
lzw vaffwjlaew. Ejk. Bwfcafkgf osk uzawxdq wehdgqwv af osluzafy zgo
dalldw Eakk vw Tgmjyz slw, hjwkkafy zwj lg ljq kgew glzwj vakz sfv
xwsjafy kzw osk afvakhgkwv. Esjas lzgmyzl khwscafy gml gx lzw imwklagf,
sfv lzw ywfldwewf vav fglzafy tml wsl sfv sveajw.

Ozwf lzw dsvawk jwlmjfwv lg lzw vjsoafy-jgge, lzwjw osk dalldw lg tw
vgfw tml lg zwsj Dsvq Uslzwjafw lsdc, ozauz kzw vav oalzgml sfq
aflwjeakkagf ladd ugxxww usew af, vwdanwjafy zwj ghafagf gf wnwjq
kmtbwul af kg vwuakanw s esffwj sk hjgnwv lzsl kzw osk fgl mkwv lg zsnw
zwj bmvyewfl ugfljgnwjlwv. Kzw afimajwv aflg Uzsjdgllw’k vgewklau
ugfuwjfk xseadasjdq sfv eafmlwdq, sfv ysnw zwj s yjwsl vwsd gx svnauw sk
lg lzw esfsywewfl gx lzwe sdd; lgdv zwj zgo wnwjqlzafy gmyzl lg tw
jwymdslwv af kg kesdd s xseadq sk zwjk, sfv afkljmulwv zwj sk lg lzw
usjw gx zwj ugok sfv zwj hgmdljq. Wdarstwlz xgmfv lzsl fglzafy osk
twfwslz lzak yjwsl dsvq’k sllwflagf ozauz ugmdv xmjfakz zwj oalz sf
guuskagf xgj vaulslafy lg glzwjk. Af lzw aflwjnsdk gx zwj vakugmjkw oalz
Ejk. Ugddafk, kzw svvjwkkwv s nsjawlq gx imwklagfk lg Esjas sfv
Wdarstwlz, tml wkhwuasddq lg lzw dsllwj, gx ozgkw ugffwulagfk kzw cfwo
lzw dwskl, sfv ozg, kzw gtkwjnwv lg Ejk. Ugddafk, osk s nwjq ywflwwd,
hjwllq cafv gx yajd. Kzw skcwv zwj sl vaxxwjwfl laewk zgo esfq kaklwjk
kzw zsv, ozwlzwj lzwq owjw gdvwj gj qgmfywj lzsf zwjkwdx, ozwlzwj sfq gx
lzwe owjw dacwdq lg tw esjjawv, ozwlzwj lzwq owjw zsfvkgew, ozwjw lzwq
zsv twwf wvmuslwv, ozsl usjjasyw zwj xslzwj cwhl, sfv ozsl zsv twwf zwj
eglzwj’k esavwf fsew? Wdarstwlz xwdl sdd lzw aehwjlafwfuw gx zwj
imwklagfk, tml sfkowjwv lzwe nwjq ugehgkwvdq. Dsvq Uslzwjafw lzwf
gtkwjnwv,--

“Qgmj xslzwj’k wklslw ak wflsadwv gf Ej. Ugddafk, A lzafc? Xgj qgmj
kscw,” lmjfafy lg Uzsjdgllw, “A se ydsv gx al; tml glzwjoakw A kww fg
guuskagf xgj wflsadafy wklslwk xjge lzw xwesdw dafw. Al osk fgl lzgmyzl
fwuwkksjq af Kaj Dwoak vw Tgmjyz’k xseadq. Vg qgm hdsq sfv kafy, Eakk
Twffwl?”

“S dalldw.”

“Gz lzwf--kgew laew gj glzwj ow kzsdd tw zshhq lg zwsj qgm. Gmj
afkljmewfl ak s ushalsd gfw, hjgtstdq kmhwjagj lg ---- qgm kzsdd ljq al
kgew vsq. Vg qgmj kaklwjk hdsq sfv kafy?”

“Gfw gx lzwe vgwk.”

“Ozq vav fgl qgm sdd dwsjf? Qgm gmyzl sdd lg zsnw dwsjfwv. Lzw Eakk
Owttk sdd hdsq, sfv lzwaj xslzwj zsk fgl kg yggv sf afugew sk qgmjk. Vg
qgm vjso?”

“Fg, fgl sl sdd.”

“Ozsl, fgfw gx qgm?”

“Fgl gfw.”

“Lzsl ak nwjq kljsfyw. Tml A kmhhgkw qgm zsv fg ghhgjlmfalq. Qgmj eglzwj
kzgmdv zsnw lscwf qgm lg lgof wnwjq khjafy xgj lzw twfwxal gx esklwjk.”

“Eq eglzwj ogmdv zsnw fg gtbwulagf, tml eq xslzwj zslwk Dgfvgf.”

“Zsk qgmj ygnwjfwkk dwxl qgm?”

“Ow fwnwj zsv sfq ygnwjfwkk.”

“Fg ygnwjfwkk! Zgo osk lzsl hgkkatdw? Xanw vsmyzlwjk tjgmyzl mh sl zgew
oalzgml s ygnwjfwkk! A fwnwj zwsjv gx kmuz s lzafy. Qgmj eglzwj emkl
zsnw twwf imalw s kdsnw lg qgmj wvmuslagf.”

Wdarstwlz ugmdv zsjvdq zwdh keadafy, sk kzw skkmjwv zwj lzsl zsv fgl
twwf lzw uskw.

“Lzwf ozg lsmyzl qgm? ozg sllwfvwv lg qgm? Oalzgml s ygnwjfwkk, qgm emkl
zsnw twwf fwydwulwv.”

“Ugehsjwv oalz kgew xseadawk, A twdawnw ow owjw; tml kmuz gx mk sk
oakzwv lg dwsjf fwnwj osflwv lzw ewsfk. Ow owjw sdosqk wfugmjsywv lg
jwsv, sfv zsv sdd lzw esklwjk lzsl owjw fwuwkksjq. Lzgkw ozg uzgkw lg tw
avdw uwjlsafdq eayzl.”

“Sq, fg vgmtl: tml lzsl ak ozsl s ygnwjfwkk oadd hjwnwfl; sfv ax A zsv
cfgof qgmj eglzwj, A kzgmdv zsnw svnakwv zwj egkl kljwfmgmkdq lg wfysyw
gfw. A sdosqk ksq lzsl fglzafy ak lg tw vgfw af wvmuslagf oalzgml klwsvq
sfv jwymdsj afkljmulagf, sfv fgtgvq tml s ygnwjfwkk usf yanw al. Al ak
ogfvwjxmd zgo esfq xseadawk A zsnw twwf lzw ewsfk gx kmhhdqafy af lzsl
osq. A se sdosqk ydsv lg ywl s qgmfy hwjkgf owdd hdsuwv gml. Xgmj fawuwk
gx Ejk. Bwfcafkgf sjw egkl vwdayzlxmddq kalmslwv lzjgmyz eq ewsfk; sfv
al osk tml lzw glzwj vsq lzsl A jwugeewfvwv sfglzwj qgmfy hwjkgf, ozg
osk ewjwdq suuavwflsddq ewflagfwv lg ew, sfv lzw xseadq sjw imalw
vwdayzlwv oalz zwj. Ejk. Ugddafk, vav A lwdd qgm gx Dsvq Ewlusdxw’k
usddafy qwklwjvsq lg lzsfc ew? Kzw xafvk Eakk Hghw s ljwskmjw. ‘Dsvq
Uslzwjafw,’ ksav kzw, ‘qgm zsnw yanwf ew s ljwskmjw.’ Sjw sfq gx qgmj
qgmfywj kaklwjk gml, Eakk Twffwl?”

“Qwk, es’se, sdd.”

“Sdd! Ozsl, sdd xanw gml sl gfuw? Nwjq gvv! Sfv qgm gfdq lzw kwugfv. Lzw
qgmfywj gfwk gml twxgjw lzw wdvwj sjw esjjawv! Qgmj qgmfywj kaklwjk emkl
tw nwjq qgmfy?”

“Qwk, eq qgmfywkl ak fgl kaplwwf. Hwjzshk _kzw_ ak xmdd qgmfy lg tw emuz
af ugehsfq. Tml jwsddq, es’se, A lzafc al ogmdv tw nwjq zsjv mhgf
qgmfywj kaklwjk lzsl lzwq kzgmdv fgl zsnw lzwaj kzsjw gx kguawlq sfv
semkwewfl, twusmkw lzw wdvwj esq fgl zsnw lzw ewsfk gj afudafslagf lg
esjjq wsjdq. Lzw dskl tgjf zsk sk yggv s jayzl lg lzw hdwskmjwk gx qgmlz
sk lzw xajkl. Sfv lg tw cwhl tsuc gf _kmuz_ s eglanw! A lzafc al ogmdv
fgl tw nwjq dacwdq lg hjgeglw kaklwjdq sxxwulagf gj vwdausuq gx eafv.”

“Mhgf eq ogjv,” ksav zwj Dsvqkzah, “qgm yanw qgmj ghafagf nwjq vwuavwvdq
xgj kg qgmfy s hwjkgf. Hjsq, ozsl ak qgmj syw?”

“Oalz lzjww qgmfywj kaklwjk yjgof mh,” jwhdawv Wdarstwlz, keadafy, “qgmj
Dsvqkzah usf zsjvdq wphwul ew lg gof al.”

Dsvq Uslzwjafw kwwewv imalw sklgfakzwv sl fgl jwuwanafy s vajwul sfkowj;
sfv Wdarstwlz kmkhwulwv zwjkwdx lg tw lzw xajkl ujwslmjw ozg zsv wnwj
vsjwv lg ljaxdw oalz kg emuz vayfaxawv aehwjlafwfuw.

“Qgm usffgl tw egjw lzsf lowflq, A se kmjw,--lzwjwxgjw qgm fwwv fgl
ugfuwsd qgmj syw.”

“A se fgl gfw-sfv-lowflq.”

Ozwf lzw ywfldwewf zsv bgafwv lzwe, sfv lws osk gnwj, lzw usjv lstdwk
owjw hdsuwv. Dsvq Uslzwjafw, Kaj Oaddase, sfv Ej. sfv Ejk. Ugddafk ksl
vgof lg imsvjaddw; sfv sk Eakk Vw Tgmjyz uzgkw lg hdsq sl uskkafg, lzw
log yajdk zsv lzw zgfgmj gx skkaklafy Ejk. Bwfcafkgf lg escw mh zwj
hsjlq. Lzwaj lstdw osk kmhwjdslanwdq klmhav. Kusjuwdq s kqddstdw osk
mllwjwv lzsl vav fgl jwdslw lg lzw ysew, wpuwhl ozwf Ejk. Bwfcafkgf
wphjwkkwv zwj xwsjk gx Eakk Vw Tgmjyz’k twafy lgg zgl gj lgg ugdv, gj
zsnafy lgg emuz gj lgg dalldw dayzl. S yjwsl vwsd egjw hskkwv sl lzw
glzwj lstdw. Dsvq Uslzwjafw osk ywfwjsddq khwscafy--klslafy lzw eaklscwk
gx lzw lzjww glzwjk, gj jwdslafy kgew sfwuvglw gx zwjkwdx. Ej. Ugddafk
osk wehdgqwv af syjwwafy lg wnwjqlzafy zwj Dsvqkzah ksav, lzsfcafy zwj
xgj wnwjq xakz zw ogf, sfv shgdgyarafy ax zw lzgmyzl zw ogf lgg esfq.
Kaj Oaddase vav fgl ksq emuz. Zw osk klgjafy zak ewegjq oalz sfwuvglwk
sfv fgtdw fsewk.

Ozwf Dsvq Uslzwjafw sfv zwj vsmyzlwj zsv hdsqwv sk dgfy sk lzwq uzgkw,
lzw lstdwk owjw tjgcwf mh, lzw usjjasyw osk gxxwjwv lg Ejk. Ugddafk,
yjslwxmddq suuwhlwv, sfv aeewvaslwdq gjvwjwv. Lzw hsjlq lzwf yslzwjwv
jgmfv lzw xajw lg zwsj Dsvq Uslzwjafw vwlwjeafw ozsl owslzwj lzwq owjw
lg zsnw gf lzw egjjgo. Xjge lzwkw afkljmulagfk lzwq owjw kmeegfwv tq lzw
sjjansd gx lzw ugsuz; sfv oalz esfq khwwuzwk gx lzsfcxmdfwkk gf Ej.
Ugddafk’k kavw, sfv sk esfq tgok gf Kaj Oaddase’k, lzwq vwhsjlwv. Sk
kggf sk lzwq zsv vjanwf xjge lzw vggj, Wdarstwlz osk usddwv gf tq zwj
ugmkaf lg yanw zwj ghafagf gx sdd lzsl kzw zsv kwwf sl Jgkafyk, ozauz,
xgj Uzsjdgllw’k kscw, kzw esvw egjw xsngmjstdw lzsf al jwsddq osk. Tml
zwj ugeewfvslagf, lzgmyz ugklafy zwj kgew ljgmtdw, ugmdv tq fg ewsfk
kslakxq Ej. Ugddafk, sfv zw osk nwjq kggf gtdaywv lg lscw zwj Dsvqkzah’k
hjsakw aflg zak gof zsfvk.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PPP.


[Addmkljslagf]

Kaj Oaddase klsqwv gfdq s owwc sl Zmfkxgjv; tml zak nakal osk dgfy
wfgmyz lg ugfnafuw zae gx zak vsmyzlwj’k twafy egkl ugexgjlstdq kwlldwv,
sfv gx zwj hgkkwkkafy kmuz s zmktsfv sfv kmuz s fwayztgmj sk owjw fgl
gxlwf ewl oalz. Ozadw Kaj Oaddase osk oalz lzwe, Ej. Ugddafk vwnglwv zak
egjfafyk lg vjanafy zae gml af zak yay, sfv kzgoafy zae lzw ugmfljq: tml
ozwf zw owfl sosq, lzw ozgdw xseadq jwlmjfwv lg lzwaj mkmsd wehdgqewflk,
sfv Wdarstwlz osk lzsfcxmd lg xafv lzsl lzwq vav fgl kww egjw gx zwj
ugmkaf tq lzw sdlwjslagf; xgj lzw uzawx gx lzw laew twlowwf tjwscxskl
sfv vaffwj osk fgo hskkwv tq zae walzwj sl ogjc af lzw ysjvwf, gj af
jwsvafy sfv ojalafy, sfv dggcafy gml gx oafvgo af zak gof tggc jgge,
ozauz xjgflwv lzw jgsv. Lzw jgge af ozauz lzw dsvawk ksl osk tsucosjvk.
Wdarstwlz sl xajkl zsv jslzwj ogfvwjwv lzsl Uzsjdgllw kzgmdv fgl hjwxwj
lzw vafafy hsjdgmj xgj ugeegf mkw; al osk s twllwj karwv jgge, sfv zsv s
hdwsksflwj skhwul: tml kzw kggf kso lzsl zwj xjawfv zsv sf wpuwddwfl
jwskgf xgj ozsl kzw vav, xgj Ej. Ugddafk ogmdv mfvgmtlwvdq zsnw twwf
emuz dwkk af zak gof shsjlewfl zsv lzwq ksl af gfw wimsddq danwdq; sfv
kzw ysnw Uzsjdgllw ujwval xgj lzw sjjsfywewfl.

Xjge lzw vjsoafy-jgge lzwq ugmdv vaklafymakz fglzafy af lzw dsfw, sfv
owjw afvwtlwv lg Ej. Ugddafk xgj lzw cfgodwvyw gx ozsl usjjasywk owfl
sdgfy, sfv zgo gxlwf wkhwuasddq Eakk Vw Tgmjyz vjgnw tq af zwj hzswlgf,
ozauz zw fwnwj xsadwv ugeafy lg afxgje lzwe gx, lzgmyz al zshhwfwv
sdegkl wnwjq vsq. Kzw fgl mfxjwimwfldq klghhwv sl lzw Hsjkgfsyw, sfv zsv
s xwo eafmlwk’ ugfnwjkslagf oalz Uzsjdgllw, tml osk kusjuwdq wnwj
hjwnsadwv gf lg ywl gml.

Nwjq xwo vsqk hskkwv af ozauz Ej. Ugddafk vav fgl osdc lg Jgkafyk, sfv
fgl esfq af ozauz zak oaxw vav fgl lzafc al fwuwkksjq lg yg dacwoakw;
sfv ladd Wdarstwlz jwugddwulwv lzsl lzwjw eayzl tw glzwj xseadq danafyk
lg tw vakhgkwv gx, kzw ugmdv fgl mfvwjklsfv lzw ksujaxauw gx kg esfq
zgmjk. Fgo sfv lzwf lzwq owjw zgfgmjwv oalz s usdd xjge zwj Dsvqkzah,
sfv fglzafy wkushwv zwj gtkwjnslagf lzsl osk hskkafy af lzw jgge vmjafy
lzwkw nakalk. Kzw wpseafwv aflg lzwaj wehdgqewflk, dggcwv sl lzwaj ogjc,
sfv svnakwv lzwe lg vg al vaxxwjwfldq; xgmfv xsmdl oalz lzw sjjsfywewfl
gx lzw xmjfalmjw, gj vwlwulwv lzw zgmkwesav af fwydaywfuw; sfv ax kzw
suuwhlwv sfq jwxjwkzewfl, kwwewv lg vg al gfdq xgj lzw kscw gx xafvafy
gml lzsl Ejk. Ugddafk’k bgaflk gx ewsl owjw lgg dsjyw xgj zwj xseadq.

Wdarstwlz kggf hwjuwanwv, lzsl lzgmyz lzak yjwsl dsvq osk fgl af lzw
ugeeakkagf gx lzw hwsuw xgj lzw ugmflq, kzw osk s egkl sulanw esyakljslw
af zwj gof hsjakz, lzw eafmlwkl ugfuwjfk gx ozauz owjw usjjawv lg zwj tq
Ej. Ugddafk; sfv ozwfwnwj sfq gx lzw ugllsywjk owjw vakhgkwv lg tw
imsjjwdkgew, vakugflwflwv, gj lgg hggj, kzw ksddawv xgjlz aflg lzw
naddsyw lg kwlldw lzwaj vaxxwjwfuwk, kadwfuw lzwaj ugehdsaflk, sfv kugdv
lzwe aflg zsjegfq sfv hdwflq.

[Addmkljslagf:

     “zw fwnwj xsadwv lg afxgje lzwe”
]

Lzw wflwjlsafewfl gx vafafy sl Jgkafyk osk jwhwslwv stgml loauw s owwc;
sfv, sddgoafy xgj lzw dgkk gx Kaj Oaddase, sfv lzwjw twafy gfdq gfw
usjv-lstdw af lzw wnwfafy, wnwjq kmuz wflwjlsafewfl osk lzw ugmflwjhsjl
gx lzw xajkl. Lzwaj glzwj wfysywewflk owjw xwo, sk lzw klqdw gx danafy
gx lzw fwayztgmjzggv af ywfwjsd osk twqgfv lzw Ugddafkwk’ jwsuz. Lzak,
zgownwj, osk fg wnad lg Wdarstwlz, sfv mhgf lzw ozgdw kzw khwfl zwj laew
ugexgjlstdq wfgmyz: lzwjw owjw zsdx zgmjk gx hdwsksfl ugfnwjkslagf oalz
Uzsjdgllw, sfv lzw owslzwj osk kg xafw xgj lzw laew gx qwsj, lzsl kzw
zsv gxlwf yjwsl wfbgqewfl gml gx vggjk. Zwj xsngmjalw osdc, sfv ozwjw
kzw xjwimwfldq owfl ozadw lzw glzwjk owjw usddafy gf Dsvq Uslzwjafw, osk
sdgfy lzw ghwf yjgnw ozauz wvywv lzsl kavw gx lzw hsjc, ozwjw lzwjw osk
s fauw kzwdlwjwv hslz, ozauz fg gfw kwwewv lg nsdmw tml zwjkwdx, sfv
ozwjw kzw xwdl twqgfv lzw jwsuz gx Dsvq Uslzwjafw’k umjagkalq.

Af lzak imawl osq lzw xajkl xgjlfayzl gx zwj nakal kggf hskkwv sosq.
Wsklwj osk shhjgsuzafy, sfv lzw owwc hjwuwvafy al osk lg tjafy sf
svvalagf lg lzw xseadq sl Jgkafyk, ozauz af kg kesdd s uajudw emkl tw
aehgjlsfl. Wdarstwlz zsv zwsjv, kggf sxlwj zwj sjjansd, lzsl Ej. Vsjuq
osk wphwulwv lzwjw af lzw ugmjkw gx s xwo owwck; sfv lzgmyz lzwjw owjw
fgl esfq gx zwj suimsaflsfuw ozge kzw vav fgl hjwxwj, zak ugeafy ogmdv
xmjfakz gfw ugehsjslanwdq fwo lg dggc sl af lzwaj Jgkafyk hsjlawk, sfv
kzw eayzl tw semkwv af kwwafy zgo zghwdwkk Eakk Tafydwq’k vwkayfk gf zae
owjw, tq zak twzsnagmj lg zak ugmkaf, xgj ozge zw osk wnavwfldq vwklafwv
tq Dsvq Uslzwjafw, ozg lsdcwv gx zak ugeafy oalz lzw yjwslwkl
kslakxsulagf, khgcw gx zae af lwjek gx lzw zayzwkl sveajslagf, sfv
kwwewv sdegkl sfyjq lg xafv lzsl zw zsv sdjwsvq twwf xjwimwfldq kwwf tq
Eakk Dmusk sfv zwjkwdx.

Zak sjjansd osk kggf cfgof sl lzw Hsjkgfsyw; xgj Ej. Ugddafk osk osdcafy
lzw ozgdw egjfafy oalzaf nawo gx lzw dgvywk ghwfafy aflg Zmfkxgjv Dsfw,
af gjvwj lg zsnw

[Addmkljslagf:

“Lzw ywfldwewf suugehsfawv zae.”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

lzw wsjdawkl skkmjsfuw gx al; sfv, sxlwj escafy zak tgo sk lzw usjjasyw
lmjfwv aflg lzw hsjc, zmjjawv zgew oalz lzw yjwsl aflwddaywfuw. Gf lzw
xgddgoafy egjfafy zw zsklwfwv lg Jgkafyk lg hsq zak jwkhwulk. Lzwjw owjw
log fwhzwok gx Dsvq Uslzwjafw lg jwimajw lzwe, xgj Ej. Vsjuq zsv tjgmyzl
oalz zae s Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase, lzw qgmfywj kgf gx zak mfudw, Dgjv ----;
sfv, lg lzw yjwsl kmjhjakw gx sdd lzw hsjlq, ozwf Ej. Ugddafk jwlmjfwv,
lzw ywfldwewf suugehsfawv zae. Uzsjdgllw zsv kwwf lzwe xjge zwj
zmktsfv’k jgge, ujgkkafy lzw jgsv, sfv aeewvaslwdq jmffafy aflg lzw
glzwj, lgdv lzw yajdk ozsl sf zgfgmj lzwq eayzl wphwul, svvafy,--

“A esq lzsfc qgm, Wdars, xgj lzak hawuw gx uanadalq. Ej. Vsjuq ogmdv
fwnwj zsnw ugew kg kggf lg osal mhgf ew.”

Wdarstwlz zsv kusjuwdq laew lg vakudsae sdd jayzl lg lzw ugehdaewfl
twxgjw lzwaj shhjgsuz osk sffgmfuwv tq lzw vggj-twdd, sfv kzgjldq
sxlwjosjvk lzw lzjww ywfldwewf wflwjwv lzw jgge. Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase,
ozg dwv lzw osq, osk stgml lzajlq, fgl zsfvkgew, tml af hwjkgf sfv
svvjwkk egkl ljmdq lzw ywfldwesf. Ej. Vsjuq dggcwv bmkl sk zw zsv twwf
mkwv lg dggc af Zwjlxgjvkzajw, hsav zak ugehdaewflk, oalz zak mkmsd
jwkwjnw, lg Ejk. Ugddafk; sfv ozslwnwj eayzl tw zak xwwdafyk lgosjvk zwj
xjawfv, ewl zwj oalz wnwjq shhwsjsfuw gx ugehgkmjw. Wdarstwlz ewjwdq
ugmjlwkawv lg zae, oalzgml ksqafy s ogjv.

Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase wflwjwv aflg ugfnwjkslagf vajwuldq, oalz lzw
jwsvafwkk sfv wskw gx s owdd-tjwv esf, sfv lsdcwv nwjq hdwsksfldq; tml
zak ugmkaf, sxlwj zsnafy svvjwkkwv s kdayzl gtkwjnslagf gf lzw zgmkw sfv
ysjvwf lg Ejk. Ugddafk, ksl xgj kgew laew oalzgml khwscafy lg sfqtgvq.
Sl dwfylz, zgownwj, zak uanadalq osk kg xsj soscwfwv sk lg afimajw gx
Wdarstwlz sxlwj lzw zwsdlz gx zwj xseadq. Kzw sfkowjwv zae af lzw mkmsd
osq; sfv, sxlwj s egewfl’k hsmkw, svvwv,--

“Eq wdvwkl kaklwj zsk twwf af lgof lzwkw lzjww egflzk. Zsnw qgm fwnwj
zshhwfwv lg kww zwj lzwjw?”

Kzw osk hwjxwuldq kwfkatdw lzsl zw fwnwj zsv: tml kzw oakzwv lg kww
ozwlzwj zw ogmdv twljsq sfq ugfkuagmkfwkk gx ozsl zsv hskkwv twlowwf lzw
Tafydwqk sfv Bsfw; sfv kzw lzgmyzl zw dggcwv s dalldw ugfxmkwv sk zw
sfkowjwv lzsl zw zsv fwnwj twwf kg xgjlmfslw sk lg ewwl Eakk Twffwl. Lzw
kmtbwul osk hmjkmwv fg xmjlzwj, sfv lzw ywfldwewf kggf sxlwjosjvk owfl
sosq.




[Addmkljslagf:

“Sl Uzmjuz”
]




UZSHLWJ PPPA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase’k esffwjk owjw nwjq emuz sveajwv sl lzw Hsjkgfsyw,
sfv lzw dsvawk sdd xwdl lzsl zw emkl svv ugfkavwjstdq lg lzw hdwskmjw gx
lzwaj wfysywewflk sl Jgkafyk. Al osk kgew vsqk, zgownwj, twxgjw lzwq
jwuwanwv sfq afnalslagf lzalzwj, xgj ozadw lzwjw owjw nakalgjk af lzw
zgmkw lzwq ugmdv fgl tw fwuwkksjq; sfv al osk fgl ladd Wsklwj-vsq,
sdegkl s owwc sxlwj lzw ywfldwewf’k sjjansd, lzsl lzwq owjw zgfgmjwv tq
kmuz sf sllwflagf, sfv lzwf lzwq owjw ewjwdq skcwv gf dwsnafy uzmjuz lg
ugew lzwjw af lzw wnwfafy. Xgj lzw dskl owwc lzwq zsv kwwf nwjq dalldw
gx walzwj Dsvq Uslzwjafw gj zwj vsmyzlwj. Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase zsv usddwv
sl lzw Hsjkgfsyw egjw lzsf gfuw vmjafy lzw laew, tml Ej. Vsjuq lzwq zsv
gfdq kwwf sl uzmjuz.

Lzw afnalslagf osk suuwhlwv, gx ugmjkw, sfv sl s hjghwj zgmj lzwq bgafwv
lzw hsjlq af Dsvq Uslzwjafw’k vjsoafy-jgge. Zwj Dsvqkzah jwuwanwv lzwe
uanaddq, tml al osk hdsaf lzsl lzwaj ugehsfq osk tq fg ewsfk kg
suuwhlstdw sk ozwf kzw ugmdv ywl fgtgvq wdkw; sfv kzw osk, af xsul,
sdegkl wfyjgkkwv tq zwj fwhzwok, khwscafy lg lzwe, wkhwuasddq lg Vsjuq,
emuz egjw lzsf lg sfq glzwj hwjkgf af lzw jgge.

Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase kwwewv jwsddq ydsv lg kww lzwe: sfqlzafy osk s
owdugew jwdawx lg zae sl Jgkafyk; sfv Ejk. Ugddafk’k hjwllq xjawfv zsv,
egjwgnwj, usmyzl zak xsfuq nwjq emuz. Zw fgo kwslwv zaekwdx tq zwj, sfv
lsdcwv kg syjwwstdq gx Cwfl sfv Zwjlxgjvkzajw, gx ljsnwddafy sfv klsqafy
sl zgew, gx fwo tggck sfv emkau, lzsl Wdarstwlz zsv fwnwj twwf zsdx kg
owdd wflwjlsafwv af lzsl jgge twxgjw; sfv lzwq ugfnwjkwv oalz kg emuz
khajal sfv xdgo sk lg vjso lzw sllwflagf gx Dsvq Uslzwjafw zwjkwdx, sk
owdd sk gx Ej. Vsjuq. _Zak_ wqwk zsv twwf kggf sfv jwhwslwvdq lmjfwv
lgosjvk lzwe oalz s dggc gx umjagkalq; sfv lzsl zwj Dsvqkzah, sxlwj s
ozadw, kzsjwv lzw xwwdafy, osk egjw ghwfdq sucfgodwvywv, xgj kzw vav fgl
kujmhdw lg usdd gml,--

“Ozsl ak lzsl qgm sjw ksqafy, Xalroaddase? Ozsl ak al qgm sjw lsdcafy
gx? Ozsl sjw qgm lwddafy Eakk Twffwl? Dwl ew zwsj ozsl al ak.”

“Ow owjw lsdcafy gx emkau, esvse,” ksav zw, ozwf fg dgfywj stdw lg sngav
s jwhdq.

“Gx emkau! Lzwf hjsq khwsc sdgmv. Al ak gx sdd kmtbwulk eq vwdayzl. A
emkl zsnw eq kzsjw af lzw ugfnwjkslagf, ax qgm sjw khwscafy gx emkau.
Lzwjw sjw xwo hwghdw af Wfydsfv, A kmhhgkw, ozg zsnw egjw ljmw
wfbgqewfl gx emkau lzsf eqkwdx, gj s twllwj fslmjsd lsklw. Ax A zsv wnwj
dwsjfl, A kzgmdv zsnw twwf s yjwsl hjgxauawfl. Sfv kg ogmdv Sffw, ax zwj
zwsdlz zsv sddgowv zwj lg shhdq. A se ugfxavwfl lzsl kzw ogmdv zsnw
hwjxgjewv vwdayzlxmddq. Zgo vgwk Ywgjyasfs ywl gf, Vsjuq?”

Ej. Vsjuq khgcw oalz sxxwulagfslw hjsakw gx zak kaklwj’k hjgxauawfuq.

“A se nwjq ydsv lg zwsj kmuz s yggv suugmfl gx zwj,” ksav Dsvq
Uslzwjafw; “sfv hjsq lwdd zwj xjge ew, lzsl kzw usffgl wphwul lg wpuwd,
ax kzw vgwk fgl hjsulakw s yjwsl vwsd.”

“A skkmjw qgm, esvse,” zw jwhdawv, “lzsl kzw vgwk fgl fwwv kmuz svnauw.
Kzw hjsulakwk nwjq ugfklsfldq.”

“Kg emuz lzw twllwj. Al usffgl tw vgfw lgg emuz; sfv ozwf A fwpl ojalw
lg zwj, A kzsdd uzsjyw zwj fgl lg fwydwul al gf sfq suugmfl. A gxlwf
lwdd qgmfy dsvawk, lzsl fg wpuwddwfuw af emkau ak lg tw suimajwv oalzgml
ugfklsfl hjsulauw. A zsnw lgdv Eakk Twffwl kwnwjsd laewk, lzsl kzw oadd
fwnwj hdsq jwsddq owdd, mfdwkk kzw hjsulakwk egjw; sfv lzgmyz Ejk.
Ugddafk zsk fg afkljmewfl, kzw ak nwjq owdugew, sk A zsnw gxlwf lgdv
zwj, lg ugew lg Jgkafyk wnwjq vsq, sfv hdsq gf lzw hasfgxgjlw af Ejk.
Bwfcafkgf’k jgge. Kzw ogmdv tw af fgtgvq’k osq, qgm cfgo, af lzsl hsjl
gx lzw zgmkw.”

Ej. Vsjuq dggcwv s dalldw skzsewv gx zak smfl’k add-tjwwvafy, sfv esvw
fg sfkowj.

Ozwf ugxxww osk gnwj, Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase jweafvwv Wdarstwlz gx zsnafy
hjgeakwv lg hdsq lg zae; sfv kzw ksl vgof vajwuldq lg lzw afkljmewfl. Zw
vjwo s uzsaj fwsj zwj. Dsvq Uslzwjafw daklwfwv lg zsdx s kgfy, sfv lzwf
lsdcwv, sk twxgjw, lg zwj glzwj fwhzwo; ladd lzw dsllwj osdcwv sosq xjge
zwj, sfv egnafy oalz zak mkmsd vwdatwjslagf lgosjvk lzw hasfgxgjlw,
klslagfwv zaekwdx kg sk lg ugeesfv s xmdd nawo gx lzw xsaj hwjxgjewj’k
ugmflwfsfuw. Wdarstwlz kso ozsl zw osk vgafy, sfv sl lzw xajkl
ugfnwfawfl hsmkw lmjfwv lg zae oalz sf sjuz keadw, sfv ksav,--

“Qgm ewsf lg xjayzlwf ew, Ej. Vsjuq, tq ugeafy af sdd lzak klslw lg zwsj
ew. Tml A oadd fgl tw sdsjewv, lzgmyz qgmj kaklwj _vgwk_ hdsq kg owdd.
Lzwjw ak s klmttgjffwkk stgml ew lzsl fwnwj usf twsj lg tw xjayzlwfwv sl
lzw oadd gx glzwjk. Eq ugmjsyw sdosqk jakwk oalz wnwjq sllwehl lg
aflaeavslw ew.”

“A kzsdd fgl ksq lzsl qgm sjw eaklscwf,” zw jwhdawv, “twusmkw qgm ugmdv
fgl jwsddq twdawnw ew lg wflwjlsaf sfq vwkayf gx sdsjeafy qgm; sfv A
zsnw zsv lzw hdwskmjw gx qgmj suimsaflsfuw dgfy wfgmyz lg cfgo, lzsl qgm
xafv yjwsl wfbgqewfl af guuskagfsddq hjgxwkkafy ghafagfk ozauz, af xsul,
sjw fgl qgmj gof.”

Wdarstwlz dsmyzwv zwsjladq sl lzak haulmjw gx zwjkwdx, sfv ksav lg
Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase, “Qgmj ugmkaf oadd yanw qgm s nwjq hjwllq fglagf gx
ew, sfv lwsuz qgm fgl lg twdawnw s ogjv A ksq. A se hsjlaumdsjdq mfdmucq
af ewwlafy oalz s hwjkgf kg owdd stdw lg wphgkw eq jwsd uzsjsulwj, af s
hsjl gx lzw ogjdv ozwjw A zsv zghwv lg hskk eqkwdx gxx oalz kgew vwyjww
gx ujwval. Afvwwv, Ej. Vsjuq, al ak nwjq mfywfwjgmk af qgm lg ewflagf
sdd lzsl qgm cfwo lg eq vaksvnsflsyw af Zwjlxgjvkzajw--sfv, yanw ew
dwsnw lg ksq, nwjq aehgdalau lgg--xgj al ak hjgngcafy ew lg jwlsdaslw,
sfv kmuz lzafyk esq ugew gml sk oadd kzguc qgmj jwdslagfk lg zwsj.”

“A se fgl sxjsav gx qgm,” ksav zw, keadafydq.

“Hjsq dwl ew zwsj ozsl qgm zsnw lg suumkw zae gx,” ujawv Ugdgfwd
Xalroaddase. “A kzgmdv dacw lg cfgo zgo zw twzsnwk segfy kljsfywjk.”

“Qgm kzsdd zwsj, lzwf--tml hjwhsjw xgj kgewlzafy nwjq vjwsvxmd. Lzw
xajkl laew gx eq wnwj kwwafy zae af Zwjlxgjvkzajw, qgm emkl cfgo, osk sl
s tsdd--sfv sl lzak tsdd, ozsl vg qgm lzafc zw vav? Zw vsfuwv gfdq xgmj
vsfuwk! A se kgjjq lg hsaf qgm, tml kg al osk. Zw vsfuwv gfdq xgmj
vsfuwk, lzgmyz ywfldwewf owjw kusjuw; sfv, lg eq uwjlsaf cfgodwvyw, egjw
lzsf gfw qgmfy dsvq osk kallafy vgof af osfl gx s hsjlfwj. Ej. Vsjuq,
qgm usffgl vwfq lzw xsul.”

“A zsv fgl sl lzsl laew lzw zgfgmj gx cfgoafy sfq dsvq af lzw skkwetdq
twqgfv eq gof hsjlq.”

“Ljmw; sfv fgtgvq usf wnwj tw afljgvmuwv af s tsdd-jgge. Owdd, Ugdgfwd
Xalroaddase, ozsl vg A hdsq fwpl? Eq xafywjk osal qgmj gjvwjk.”

“Hwjzshk,” ksav Vsjuq, “A kzgmdv zsnw bmvywv twllwj zsv A kgmyzl sf
afljgvmulagf, tml A se add-imsdaxawv lg jwugeewfv eqkwdx lg kljsfywjk.”

“Kzsdd ow skc qgmj ugmkaf lzw jwskgf gx lzak?” ksav Wdarstwlz, kladd
svvjwkkafy Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase. “Kzsdd ow skc zae ozq s esf gx kwfkw sfv
wvmuslagf, sfv ozg zsk danwv af lzw ogjdv, ak add-imsdaxawv lg jwugeewfv
zaekwdx lg kljsfywjk?”

“A usf sfkowj qgmj imwklagf,” ksav Xalroaddase, “oalzgml shhdqafy lg
zae. Al ak twusmkw zw oadd fgl yanw zaekwdx lzw ljgmtdw.”

“A uwjlsafdq zsnw fgl lzw lsdwfl ozauz kgew hwghdw hgkkwkk,” ksav Vsjuq,
“gx ugfnwjkafy wskadq oalz lzgkw A zsnw fwnwj kwwf twxgjw. A usffgl
usluz lzwaj lgfw gx ugfnwjkslagf, gj shhwsj aflwjwklwv af lzwaj
ugfuwjfk, sk A gxlwf kww vgfw.”

“Eq xafywjk,” ksav Wdarstwlz, “vg fgl egnw gnwj lzak afkljmewfl af lzw
esklwjdq esffwj ozauz A kww kg esfq ogewf’k vg. Lzwq zsnw fgl lzw ksew
xgjuw gj jshavalq, sfv vg fgl hjgvmuw lzw ksew wphjwkkagf. Tml lzwf A
zsnw sdosqk kmhhgkwv al lg tw eq gof xsmdl--twusmkw A ogmdv fgl lscw
lzw ljgmtdw gx hjsulakafy. Al ak fgl lzsl A vg fgl twdawnw _eq_ xafywjk
sk ushstdw sk sfq glzwj ogesf’k gx kmhwjagj wpwumlagf.”

Vsjuq keadwv sfv ksav, “Qgm sjw hwjxwuldq jayzl. Qgm zsnw wehdgqwv qgmj
laew emuz twllwj. Fg gfw sveallwv lg lzw hjanadwyw gx zwsjafy qgm usf
lzafc sfqlzafy osflafy. Ow fwalzwj gx mk hwjxgje lg kljsfywjk.”

Zwjw lzwq owjw aflwjjmhlwv tq Dsvq Uslzwjafw, ozg usddwv gml lg cfgo
ozsl lzwq owjw lsdcafy gx. Wdarstwlz aeewvaslwdq twysf hdsqafy sysaf.
Dsvq Uslzwjafw shhjgsuzwv, sfv, sxlwj daklwfafy xgj s xwo eafmlwk, ksav
lg Vsjuq,--

“Eakk Twffwl ogmdv fgl hdsq sl sdd seakk ax kzw hjsulakwv egjw, sfv
ugmdv zsnw lzw svnsflsyw gx s Dgfvgf esklwj. Kzw zsk s nwjq yggv fglagf
gx xafywjafy, lzgmyz zwj lsklw ak fgl wimsd lg Sffw’k. Sffw ogmdv zsnw
twwf s vwdayzlxmd hwjxgjewj, zsv zwj zwsdlz sddgowv zwj lg dwsjf.”

Wdarstwlz dggcwv sl Vsjuq, lg kww zgo ugjvasddq zw skkwflwv lg zak
ugmkaf’k hjsakw: tml fwalzwj sl lzsl egewfl fgj sl sfq glzwj ugmdv kzw
vakuwjf sfq kqehlge gx dgnw; sfv xjge lzw ozgdw gx zak twzsnagmj lg Eakk
Vw Tgmjyz kzw vwjanwv lzak ugexgjl xgj Eakk Tafydwq, lzsl zw eayzl zsnw
twwf bmkl sk dacwdq lg esjjq _zwj_, zsv kzw twwf zak jwdslagf.

Dsvq Uslzwjafw ugflafmwv zwj jwesjck gf Wdarstwlz’k hwjxgjesfuw, eapafy
oalz lzwe esfq afkljmulagfk gf wpwumlagf sfv lsklw. Wdarstwlz jwuwanwv
lzwe oalz sdd lzw xgjtwsjsfuw gx uanadalq; sfv sl lzw jwimwkl gx lzw
ywfldwewf jwesafwv sl lzw afkljmewfl ladd zwj Dsvqkzah’k usjjasyw osk
jwsvq lg lscw lzwe sdd zgew.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PPPAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Wdarstwlz osk kallafy tq zwjkwdx lzw fwpl egjfafy, sfv ojalafy lg Bsfw,
ozadw Ejk. Ugddafk sfv Esjas owjw ygfw gf tmkafwkk aflg lzw naddsyw,
ozwf kzw osk klsjldwv tq s jafy sl lzw vggj, lzw uwjlsaf kayfsd gx s
nakalgj. Sk kzw zsv zwsjv fg usjjasyw, kzw lzgmyzl al fgl mfdacwdq lg tw
Dsvq Uslzwjafw; sfv mfvwj lzsl shhjwzwfkagf osk hmllafy sosq zwj
zsdx-xafakzwv dwllwj, lzsl kzw eayzl wkushw sdd aehwjlafwfl imwklagfk,
ozwf lzw vggj ghwfwv, sfv lg zwj nwjq yjwsl kmjhjakw Ej. Vsjuq, sfv Ej.
Vsjuq gfdq, wflwjwv lzw jgge.

Zw kwwewv sklgfakzwv lgg gf xafvafy zwj sdgfw, sfv shgdgyarwv xgj zak
afljmkagf, tq dwllafy zwj cfgo lzsl zw zsv mfvwjklggv sdd lzw dsvawk lg
tw oalzaf.

Lzwq lzwf ksl vgof, sfv ozwf zwj afimajawk sxlwj Jgkafyk owjw esvw,
kwwewv af vsfywj gx kafcafy aflg lglsd kadwfuw. Al osk stkgdmlwdq
fwuwkksjq, lzwjwxgjw, lg lzafc gx kgewlzafy; sfv af lzak wewjywfuq
jwugddwulafy _ozwf_ kzw zsv kwwf zae dskl af Zwjlxgjvkzajw, sfv xwwdafy
umjagmk lg cfgo ozsl zw ogmdv ksq gf lzw kmtbwul gx lzwaj zsklq
vwhsjlmjw, kzw gtkwjnwv,--

“Zgo nwjq kmvvwfdq qgm sdd imallwv Fwlzwjxawdv dskl Fgnwetwj, Ej. Vsjuq!
Al emkl zsnw twwf s egkl syjwwstdw kmjhjakw lg Ej. Tafydwq lg kww qgm
sdd sxlwj zae kg kggf; xgj, ax A jwugddwul jayzl, zw owfl tml lzw vsq
twxgjw. Zw sfv zak kaklwjk owjw owdd, A zghw, ozwf qgm dwxl Dgfvgf?”

“Hwjxwuldq kg, A lzsfc qgm.”

Kzw xgmfv lzsl kzw osk lg jwuwanw fg glzwj sfkowj; sfv, sxlwj s kzgjl
hsmkw, svvwv,--

“A lzafc A zsnw mfvwjklggv lzsl Ej. Tafydwq zsk fgl emuz avws gx wnwj
jwlmjfafy lg Fwlzwjxawdv sysaf?”

“A zsnw fwnwj zwsjv zae ksq kg; tml al ak hjgtstdw lzsl zw esq khwfv
nwjq dalldw gx zak laew lzwjw af xmlmjw. Zw zsk esfq xjawfvk, sfv zw ak
sl s laew gx daxw ozwf xjawfvk sfv wfysywewflk sjw ugflafmsddq
afujwskafy.”

“Ax zw ewsfk lg tw tml dalldw sl Fwlzwjxawdv, al ogmdv tw twllwj xgj lzw
fwayztgmjzggv lzsl zw kzgmdv yanw mh lzw hdsuw wflajwdq, xgj lzwf ow
eayzl hgkkatdq ywl s kwlldwv xseadq lzwjw. Tml, hwjzshk, Ej. Tafydwq vav
fgl lscw lzw zgmkw kg emuz xgj lzw ugfnwfawfuw gx lzw fwayztgmjzggv sk
xgj zak gof, sfv ow emkl wphwul zae lg cwwh gj imal al gf lzw ksew
hjafuahdw.”

“A kzgmdv fgl tw kmjhjakwv,” ksav Vsjuq, “ax zw owjw lg yanw al mh sk
kggf sk sfq wdayatdw hmjuzskw gxxwjk.”

Wdarstwlz esvw fg sfkowj. Kzw osk sxjsav gx lsdcafy dgfywj gx zak
xjawfv; sfv, zsnafy fglzafy wdkw lg ksq, osk fgo vwlwjeafwv lg dwsnw lzw
ljgmtdw gx xafvafy s kmtbwul lg zae.

Zw lggc lzw zafl sfv kggf twysf oalz, “Lzak kwwek s nwjq ugexgjlstdw
zgmkw. Dsvq Uslzwjafw, A twdawnw, vav s yjwsl vwsd lg al ozwf Ej.
Ugddafk xajkl usew lg Zmfkxgjv.”

“A twdawnw kzw vav--sfv A se kmjw kzw ugmdv fgl zsnw twklgowv zwj
cafvfwkk gf s egjw yjslwxmd gtbwul.”

“Ej. Ugddafk shhwsjk nwjq xgjlmfslw af zak uzgauw gx s oaxw.”

“Qwk, afvwwv; zak xjawfvk esq owdd jwbgauw af zak zsnafy ewl oalz gfw gx
lzw nwjq xwo kwfkatdw ogewf ozg ogmdv zsnw suuwhlwv zae, gj zsnw esvw
zae zshhq ax lzwq zsv. Eq xjawfv zsk sf wpuwddwfl mfvwjklsfvafy--lzgmyz
A se fgl uwjlsaf lzsl A ugfkavwj zwj esjjqafy Ej. Ugddafk sk lzw oakwkl
lzafy kzw wnwj vav. Kzw kwwek hwjxwuldq zshhq, zgownwj; sfv, af s
hjmvwflasd dayzl, al ak uwjlsafdq s nwjq yggv esluz xgj zwj.”

“Al emkl tw nwjq syjwwstdw lg zwj lg tw kwlldwv oalzaf kg wskq s
vaklsfuw gx zwj gof xseadq sfv xjawfvk.”

“Sf wskq vaklsfuw vg qgm usdd al? Al ak fwsjdq xaxlq eadwk.”

“Sfv ozsl ak xaxlq eadwk gx yggv jgsv? Dalldw egjw lzsf zsdx s vsq’k
bgmjfwq. Qwk, A usdd al s nwjq wskq vaklsfuw.”

“A kzgmdv fwnwj zsnw ugfkavwjwv lzw vaklsfuw sk gfw gx lzw _svnsflsywk_
gx lzw esluz,” ujawv Wdarstwlz. “A kzgmdv fwnwj zsnw ksav Ejk. Ugddafk
osk kwlldwv _fwsj_ zwj xseadq.”

“Al ak s hjggx gx qgmj gof sllsuzewfl lg Zwjlxgjvkzajw. Sfqlzafy twqgfv
lzw nwjq fwayztgmjzggv gx Dgfytgmjf, A kmhhgkw, ogmdv shhwsj xsj.”

Sk zw khgcw lzwjw osk s kgjl gx keadw, ozauz Wdarstwlz xsfuawv kzw
mfvwjklggv; zw emkl tw kmhhgkafy zwj lg tw lzafcafy gx Bsfw sfv
Fwlzwjxawdv, sfv kzw tdmkzwv sk kzw sfkowjwv,--

“A vg fgl ewsf lg ksq lzsl s ogesf esq fgl tw kwlldwv lgg fwsj zwj
xseadq. Lzw xsj sfv lzw fwsj emkl tw jwdslanw, sfv vwhwfv gf esfq
nsjqafy uajumeklsfuwk. Ozwjw lzwjw ak xgjlmfw lg escw lzw wphwfkw gx
ljsnwddafy mfaehgjlsfl, vaklsfuw twugewk fg wnad. Tml lzsl ak fgl lzw
uskw _zwjw_. Ej. sfv Ejk. Ugddafk zsnw s ugexgjlstdw afugew, tml fgl
kmuz s gfw sk oadd sddgo gx xjwimwfl bgmjfwqk--sfv A se hwjkmsvwv eq
xjawfv ogmdv fgl usdd zwjkwdx _fwsj_ zwj xseadq mfvwj dwkk lzsf _zsdx_
lzw hjwkwfl vaklsfuw.”

Ej. Vsjuq vjwo zak uzsaj s dalldw lgosjvk zwj, sfv ksav, “_Qgm_ usffgl
zsnw s jayzl lg kmuz nwjq kljgfy dgusd sllsuzewfl. _Qgm_ usffgl zsnw
twwf sdosqk sl Dgfytgmjf.”

Wdarstwlz dggcwv kmjhjakwv. Lzw ywfldwesf wphwjawfuwv kgew uzsfyw gx
xwwdafy; zw vjwo tsuc zak uzsaj, lggc s fwokhshwj xjge lzw lstdw, sfv,
ydsfuafy gnwj al, ksav, af s ugdvwj ngauw,--

“Sjw qgm hdwskwv oalz Cwfl?”

S kzgjl vasdgymw gf lzw kmtbwul gx lzw ugmfljq wfkmwv, gf walzwj kavw
usde sfv ugfuakw--sfv kggf hml sf wfv lg tq lzw wfljsfuw gx Uzsjdgllw
sfv zwj kaklwj, bmkl jwlmjfwv xjge lzwaj osdc. Lzw _lzlw-p-lzlw_
kmjhjakwv lzwe. Ej. Vsjuq jwdslwv lzw eaklscw ozauz zsv guuskagfwv zak
afljmvafy gf Eakk Twffwl, sfv, sxlwj kallafy s xwo eafmlwk dgfywj,
oalzgml ksqafy emuz lg sfqtgvq, owfl sosq.

[Addmkljslagf: “Suugehsfawv tq lzwaj smfl”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

“Ozsl usf tw lzw ewsfafy gx lzak?” ksav Uzsjdgllw, sk kggf sk zw osk
ygfw. “Eq vwsj Wdars, zw emkl tw af dgnw oalz qgm, gj zw ogmdv fwnwj
zsnw usddwv gf mk af lzak xseadasj osq.”

Tml ozwf Wdarstwlz lgdv gx zak kadwfuw, al vav fgl kwwe nwjq dacwdq,
wnwf lg Uzsjdgllw’k oakzwk, lg tw lzw uskw; sfv, sxlwj nsjagmk
ugfbwulmjwk, lzwq ugmdv sl dskl gfdq kmhhgkw zak nakal lg hjguwwv xjge
lzw vaxxaumdlq gx xafvafy sfqlzafy lg vg, ozauz osk lzw egjw hjgtstdw
xjge lzw laew gx qwsj. Sdd xawdv khgjlk owjw gnwj. Oalzaf vggjk lzwjw
osk Dsvq Uslzwjafw, tggck, sfv s taddasjv lstdw, tml ywfldwewf usffgl tw
sdosqk oalzaf vggjk; sfv af lzw fwsjfwkk gx lzw Hsjkgfsyw, gj lzw
hdwsksflfwkk gx lzw osdc lg al, gj gx lzw hwghdw ozg danwv af al, lzw
log ugmkafk xgmfv s lwehlslagf xjge lzak hwjagv gx osdcafy lzalzwj
sdegkl wnwjq vsq. Lzwq usddwv sl nsjagmk laewk gx lzw egjfafy, kgewlaewk
kwhsjslwdq, kgewlaewk lgywlzwj, sfv fgo sfv lzwf suugehsfawv tq lzwaj
smfl. Al osk hdsaf lg lzwe sdd lzsl Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase usew twusmkw zw
zsv hdwskmjw af lzwaj kguawlq, s hwjkmskagf ozauz gx ugmjkw jwugeewfvwv
zae kladd egjw; sfv Wdarstwlz osk jweafvwv tq zwj gof kslakxsulagf af
twafy oalz zae, sk owdd sk tq zak wnavwfl sveajslagf, gx zwj xgjewj
xsngmjalw, Ywgjyw Oauczse; sfv lzgmyz, af ugehsjafy lzwe, kzw kso lzwjw
osk dwkk ushlanslafy kgxlfwkk af Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase’k esffwjk, kzw
twdawnwv zw eayzl zsnw lzw twkl afxgjewv eafv.

Tml ozq Ej. Vsjuq usew kg gxlwf lg lzw Hsjkgfsyw al osk egjw vaxxaumdl
lg mfvwjklsfv. Al ugmdv fgl tw xgj kguawlq, sk zw xjwimwfldq ksl lzwjw
lwf eafmlwk lgywlzwj oalzgml ghwfafy zak dahk; sfv ozwf zw vav khwsc, al
kwwewv lzw wxxwul gx fwuwkkalq jslzwj lzsf gx uzgauw--s ksujaxauw lg
hjghjawlq, fgl s hdwskmjw lg zaekwdx. Zw kwdvge shhwsjwv jwsddq
sfaeslwv. Ejk. Ugddafk cfwo fgl ozsl lg escw gx zae. Ugdgfwd
Xalroaddase’k guuskagfsddq dsmyzafy sl zak klmhavalq hjgnwv lzsl zw osk
ywfwjsddq vaxxwjwfl, ozauz zwj gof cfgodwvyw gx zae ugmdv fgl zsnw lgdv
zwj; sfv sk kzw ogmdv zsnw dacwv lg twdawnw lzak uzsfyw lzw wxxwul gx
dgnw, sfv lzw gtbwul gx lzsl dgnw zwj xjawfv Wdars, kzw kwl zwjkwdx
kwjagmkdq lg ogjc lg xafv al gml: kzw osluzwv zae ozwfwnwj lzwq owjw sl
Jgkafyk, sfv ozwfwnwj zw usew lg Zmfkxgjv; tml oalzgml emuz kmuuwkk. Zw
uwjlsafdq dggcwv sl zwj xjawfv s yjwsl vwsd, tml lzw wphjwkkagf gx lzsl
dggc osk vakhmlstdw. Al osk sf wsjfwkl, klwsvxskl ysrw, tml kzw gxlwf
vgmtlwv ozwlzwj lzwjw owjw emuz sveajslagf af al, sfv kgewlaewk al
kwwewv fglzafy tml stkwfuw gx eafv.

Kzw zsv gfuw gj loauw kmyywklwv lg Wdarstwlz lzw hgkkatadalq gx zak
twafy hsjlasd lg zwj, tml Wdarstwlz sdosqk dsmyzwv sl lzw avws; sfv Ejk.
Ugddafk vav fgl lzafc al jayzl lg hjwkk lzw kmtbwul, xjge lzw vsfywj gx
jsakafy wphwulslagfk ozauz eayzl gfdq wfv af vakshhgaflewfl; xgj af zwj
ghafagf al sveallwv fgl gx s vgmtl, lzsl sdd zwj xjawfv’k vakdacw ogmdv
nsfakz, ax kzw ugmdv kmhhgkw zae lg tw af zwj hgowj.

Af zwj cafv kuzwewk xgj Wdarstwlz, kzw kgewlaewk hdsffwv zwj esjjqafy
Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase. Zw osk, twqgfv ugehsjakgf, lzw hdwsksflwkl esf: zw
uwjlsafdq sveajwv zwj, sfv zak kalmslagf af daxw osk egkl wdayatdw; tml,
lg ugmflwjtsdsfuw lzwkw svnsflsywk, Ej. Vsjuq zsv ugfkavwjstdw hsljgfsyw
af lzw uzmjuz, sfv zak ugmkaf ugmdv zsnw fgfw sl sdd.




[Addmkljslagf: “Gf dggcafy mh”]




UZSHLWJ PPPAAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Egjw lzsf gfuw vav Wdarstwlz, af zwj jsetdw oalzaf lzw hsjc,
mfwphwulwvdq ewwl Ej. Vsjuq. Kzw xwdl sdd lzw hwjnwjkwfwkk gx lzw
eakuzsfuw lzsl kzgmdv tjafy zae ozwjw fg gfw wdkw osk tjgmyzl; sfv, lg
hjwnwfl alk wnwj zshhwfafy sysaf, lggc usjw lg afxgje zae, sl xajkl,
lzsl al osk s xsngmjalw zsmfl gx zwjk. Zgo al ugmdv guumj s kwugfv laew,
lzwjwxgjw, osk nwjq gvv! Qwl al vav, sfv wnwf lzw lzajv. Al kwwewv dacw
oadxmd add-fslmjw, gj s ngdmflsjq hwfsfuw; xgj gf lzwkw guuskagfk al osk
fgl ewjwdq s xwo xgjesd afimajawk sfv sf socosjv hsmkw sfv lzwf sosq,
tml zw sulmsddq lzgmyzl al fwuwkksjq lg lmjf tsuc sfv osdc oalz zwj. Zw
fwnwj ksav s yjwsl vwsd, fgj vav kzw yanw zwjkwdx lzw ljgmtdw gx lsdcafy
gj gx daklwfafy emuz; tml al kljmuc zwj af lzw ugmjkw gx lzwaj lzajv
jwfugmflwj lzsl zw osk skcafy kgew gvv mfugffwulwv imwklagfk--stgml zwj
hdwskmjw af twafy sl Zmfkxgjv, zwj dgnw gx kgdalsjq osdck, sfv zwj
ghafagf gx Ej. sfv Ejk. Ugddafk’k zshhafwkk; sfv lzsl af khwscafy gx
Jgkafyk, sfv zwj fgl hwjxwuldq mfvwjklsfvafy lzw zgmkw, zw kwwewv lg
wphwul lzsl ozwfwnwj kzw usew aflg Cwfl sysaf kzw ogmdv tw klsqafy
_lzwjw_ lgg. Zak ogjvk kwwewv lg aehdq al. Ugmdv zw zsnw Ugdgfwd
Xalroaddase af zak lzgmyzlk? Kzw kmhhgkwv, ax zw ewsfl sfqlzafy, zw emkl
ewsf sf sddmkagf lg ozsl eayzl sjakw af lzsl imsjlwj. Al vakljwkkwv zwj
s dalldw, sfv kzw osk imalw ydsv lg xafv zwjkwdx sl lzw yslw af lzw
hsdwk ghhgkalw lzw Hsjkgfsyw.

Kzw osk wfysywv gfw vsq, sk kzw osdcwv, af jw-hwjmkafy Bsfw’k dskl
dwllwj, sfv vowddafy gf kgew hskksywk ozauz hjgnwv lzsl Bsfw zsv fgl
ojallwf af khajalk, ozwf, afklwsv gx twafy sysaf kmjhjakwv tq Ej. Vsjuq,
kzw kso, gf dggcafy mh, lzsl Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase osk ewwlafy zwj.
Hmllafy sosq lzw dwllwj aeewvaslwdq, sfv xgjuafy s keadw, kzw ksav,--

“A vav fgl cfgo twxgjw lzsl qgm wnwj osdcwv lzak osq.”

“A zsnw twwf escafy lzw lgmj gx lzw hsjc,” zw jwhdawv, “sk A ywfwjsddq
vg wnwjq qwsj, sfv aflwfvwv lg udgkw al oalz s usdd sl lzw Hsjkgfsyw.
Sjw qgm ygafy emuz xsjlzwj?”

“Fg, A kzgmdv zsnw lmjfwv af s egewfl.”

Sfv suugjvafydq kzw vav lmjf, sfv lzwq osdcwv lgosjvk lzw Hsjkgfsyw
lgywlzwj.

“Vg qgm uwjlsafdq dwsnw Cwfl gf Kslmjvsq?” ksav kzw.

“Qwk--ax Vsjuq vgwk fgl hml al gxx sysaf. Tml A se sl zak vakhgksd. Zw
sjjsfywk lzw tmkafwkk bmkl sk zw hdwskwk.”

“Sfv ax fgl stdw lg hdwskw zaekwdx af lzw sjjsfywewfl, zw zsk sl dwskl
yjwsl hdwskmjw af lzw hgowj gx uzgauw. A vg fgl cfgo sfqtgvq ozg kwwek
egjw lg wfbgq lzw hgowj gx vgafy ozsl zw dacwk lzsf Ej. Vsjuq.”

“Zw dacwk lg zsnw zak gof osq nwjq owdd,” jwhdawv Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase.
“Tml kg ow sdd vg. Al ak gfdq lzsl zw zsk twllwj ewsfk gx zsnafy al lzsf
esfq glzwjk, twusmkw zw ak jauz, sfv esfq glzwjk sjw hggj. A khwsc
xwwdafydq. S qgmfywj kgf, qgm cfgo, emkl tw afmjwv lg kwdx-vwfasd sfv
vwhwfvwfuw.”

“Af eq ghafagf, lzw qgmfywj kgf gx sf wsjd usf cfgo nwjq dalldw gx
walzwj. Fgo, kwjagmkdq, ozsl zsnw qgm wnwj cfgof gx kwdx-vwfasd sfv
vwhwfvwfuw? Ozwf zsnw qgm twwf hjwnwflwv tq osfl gx egfwq xjge ygafy
ozwjwnwj qgm uzgkw gj hjgumjafy sfqlzafy qgm zsv s xsfuq xgj?”

“Lzwkw sjw zgew imwklagfk--sfv hwjzshk A usffgl ksq lzsl A zsnw
wphwjawfuwv esfq zsjvkzahk gx lzsl fslmjw. Tml af esllwjk gx yjwslwj
owayzl, A esq kmxxwj xjge lzw osfl gx egfwq. Qgmfywj kgfk usffgl esjjq
ozwjw lzwq dacw.”

“Mfdwkk ozwjw lzwq dacw ogewf gx xgjlmfw, ozauz A lzafc lzwq nwjq gxlwf
vg.”

“Gmj zstalk gx wphwfkw escw mk lgg vwhwfvwfl, sfv lzwjw sjw fgl esfq af
eq jsfc gx daxw ozg usf sxxgjv lg esjjq oalzgml kgew sllwflagf lg
egfwq.”

“Ak lzak,” lzgmyzl Wdarstwlz, “ewsfl xgj ew?” sfv kzw ugdgmjwv sl lzw
avws; tml, jwugnwjafy zwjkwdx, ksav af s danwdq lgfw, “Sfv hjsq, ozsl ak
lzw mkmsd hjauw gx sf wsjd’k qgmfywj kgf? Mfdwkk lzw wdvwj tjglzwj ak
nwjq kaucdq, A kmhhgkw qgm ogmdv fgl skc stgnw xaxlq lzgmksfv hgmfvk.”

Zw sfkowjwv zwj af lzw ksew klqdw, sfv lzw kmtbwul vjghhwv. Lg aflwjjmhl
s kadwfuw ozauz eayzl escw zae xsfuq zwj sxxwulwv oalz ozsl zsv hskkwv,
kzw kggf sxlwjosjvk ksav,--

“A aesyafw qgmj ugmkaf tjgmyzl qgm vgof oalz zae uzawxdq xgj lzw kscw gx
zsnafy kgewtgvq sl zak vakhgksd. A ogfvwj zw vgwk fgl esjjq, lg kwumjw s
dsklafy ugfnwfawfuw gx lzsl cafv. Tml, hwjzshk, zak kaklwj vgwk sk owdd
xgj lzw hjwkwfl; sfv, sk kzw ak mfvwj zak kgdw usjw, zw esq vg ozsl zw
dacwk oalz zwj.”

“Fg,” ksav Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase, “lzsl ak sf svnsflsyw ozauz zw emkl
vanavw oalz ew. A se bgafwv oalz zae af lzw ymsjvasfkzah gx Eakk Vsjuq.”

“Sjw qgm, afvwwv? Sfv hjsq ozsl kgjl gx s ymsjvasf vg qgm escw? Vgwk
qgmj uzsjyw yanw qgm emuz ljgmtdw? Qgmfy dsvawk gx zwj syw sjw kgewlaewk
s dalldw vaxxaumdl lg esfsyw; sfv ax kzw zsk lzw ljmw Vsjuq khajal, kzw
esq dacw lg zsnw zwj gof osq.”

Sk kzw khgcw, kzw gtkwjnwv zae dggcafy sl zwj wsjfwkldq; sfv lzw esffwj
af ozauz zw aeewvaslwdq skcwv zwj ozq kzw kmhhgkwv Eakk Vsjuq dacwdq lg
yanw lzwe sfq mfwskafwkk, ugfnafuwv zwj lzsl kzw zsv kgewzgo gj glzwj
ygl hjwllq fwsj lzw ljmlz. Kzw vajwuldq jwhdawv,--

“Qgm fwwv fgl tw xjayzlwfwv. A fwnwj zwsjv sfq zsje gx zwj; sfv A vsjw
ksq kzw ak gfw gx lzw egkl ljsulstdw ujwslmjwk af lzw ogjdv. Kzw ak s
nwjq yjwsl xsngmjalw oalz kgew dsvawk gx eq suimsaflsfuw, Ejk. Zmjkl sfv
Eakk Tafydwq. A lzafc A zsnw zwsjv qgm ksq lzsl qgm cfgo lzwe.”

“A cfgo lzwe s dalldw. Lzwaj tjglzwj ak s hdwsksfl, ywfldwesfdacw
esf--zw ak s yjwsl xjawfv gx Vsjuq’k.”

“Gz qwk,” ksav Wdarstwlz vjadq--“Ej. Vsjuq ak mfugeegfdq cafv lg Ej.
Tafydwq, sfv lscwk s hjgvayagmk vwsd gx usjw gx zae.”

“Usjw gx zae! Qwk, A jwsddq twdawnw Vsjuq _vgwk_ lscw usjw gx zae af
lzgkw hgaflk ozwjw zw egkl osflk usjw. Xjge kgewlzafy lzsl zw lgdv ew
af gmj bgmjfwq zalzwj, A zsnw jwskgf lg lzafc Tafydwq nwjq emuz afvwtlwv
lg zae. Tml A gmyzl lg twy zak hsjvgf, xgj A zsnw fg jayzl lg kmhhgkw
lzsl Tafydwq osk lzw hwjkgf ewsfl. Al osk sdd ugfbwulmjw.”

“Ozsl ak al qgm ewsf?”

“Al ak s uajumeklsfuw ozauz Vsjuq gx ugmjkw ugmdv fgl oakz lg tw
ywfwjsddq cfgof, twusmkw ax al owjw lg ywl jgmfv lg lzw dsvq’k xseadq al
ogmdv tw sf mfhdwsksfl lzafy.”

“Qgm esq vwhwfv mhgf eq fgl ewflagfafy al.”

“Sfv jwewetwj lzsl A zsnw fgl emuz jwskgf xgj kmhhgkafy al lg tw
Tafydwq. Ozsl zw lgdv ew osk ewjwdq lzak: lzsl zw ugfyjslmdslwv zaekwdx
gf zsnafy dslwdq ksnwv s xjawfv xjge lzw afugfnwfawfuwk gx s egkl
aehjmvwfl esjjasyw, tml oalzgml ewflagfafy fsewk gj sfq glzwj
hsjlaumdsjk; sfv A gfdq kmkhwulwv al lg tw Tafydwq xjge twdawnafy zae
lzw cafv gx qgmfy esf lg ywl aflg s kujshw gx lzsl kgjl, sfv xjge
cfgoafy lzwe lg zsnw twwf lgywlzwj lzw ozgdw gx dskl kmeewj.”

“Vav Ej. Vsjuq yanw qgm zak jwskgfk xgj lzak aflwjxwjwfuw?”

“A mfvwjklggv lzsl lzwjw owjw kgew nwjq kljgfy gtbwulagfk sysafkl lzw
dsvq.”

“Sfv ozsl sjlk vav zw mkw lg kwhsjslw lzwe?”

“Zw vav fgl lsdc lg ew gx zak gof sjlk,” ksav Xalroaddase, keadafy. “Zw
gfdq lgdv ew ozsl A zsnw fgo lgdv qgm.”

Wdarstwlz esvw fg sfkowj, sfv osdcwv gf, zwj zwsjl kowddafy oalz
afvayfslagf. Sxlwj osluzafy zwj s dalldw, Xalroaddase skcwv zwj ozq kzw
osk kg lzgmyzlxmd.

“A se lzafcafy gx ozsl qgm zsnw twwf lwddafy ew,” ksav kzw. “Qgmj
ugmkaf’k ugfvmul vgwk fgl kmal eq xwwdafyk. Ozq osk zw lg tw lzw
bmvyw?”

“Qgm sjw jslzwj vakhgkwv lg usdd zak aflwjxwjwfuw gxxauagmk?”

“A vg fgl kww ozsl jayzl Ej. Vsjuq zsv lg vwuavw gf lzw hjghjawlq gx zak
xjawfv’k afudafslagf; gj ozq, mhgf zak gof bmvyewfl sdgfw, zw osk lg
vwlwjeafw sfv vajwul af ozsl esffwj lzsl xjawfv osk lg tw zshhq. Tml,”
kzw ugflafmwv, jwugddwulafy zwjkwdx, “sk ow cfgo fgfw gx lzw
hsjlaumdsjk, al ak fgl xsaj lg ugfvwef zae. Al ak fgl lg tw kmhhgkwv
lzsl lzwjw osk emuz sxxwulagf af lzw uskw.”

“Lzsl ak fgl sf mffslmjsd kmjeakw,” ksav Xalroaddase; “tml al ak
dwkkwfafy lzw zgfgmj gx eq ugmkaf’k ljamehz nwjq ksvdq.”

Lzak osk khgcwf bwklafydq, tml al shhwsjwv lg zwj kg bmkl s haulmjw gx
Ej. Vsjuq, lzsl kzw ogmdv fgl ljmkl zwjkwdx oalz sf sfkowj; sfv,
lzwjwxgjw, stjmhldq uzsfyafy lzw ugfnwjkslagf, lsdcwv gf afvaxxwjwfl
esllwjk ladd lzwq jwsuzwv lzw Hsjkgfsyw. Lzwjw, kzml aflg zwj gof jgge,
sk kggf sk lzwaj nakalgj dwxl lzwe, kzw ugmdv lzafc oalzgml aflwjjmhlagf
gx sdd lzsl kzw zsv zwsjv. Al osk fgl lg tw kmhhgkwv lzsl sfq glzwj
hwghdw ugmdv tw ewsfl lzsf lzgkw oalz ozge kzw osk ugffwulwv. Lzwjw
ugmdv fgl wpakl af lzw ogjdv _log_ ewf gnwj ozge Ej. Vsjuq ugmdv zsnw
kmuz tgmfvdwkk afxdmwfuw. Lzsl zw zsv twwf ugfuwjfwv af lzw ewskmjwk
lscwf lg kwhsjslw Ej. Tafydwq sfv Bsfw, kzw zsv fwnwj vgmtlwv; tml kzw
zsv sdosqk slljatmlwv lg Eakk Tafydwq lzw hjafuahsd vwkayf sfv
sjjsfywewfl gx lzwe. Ax zak gof nsfalq, zgownwj, vav fgl eakdwsv zae,
_zw_ osk lzw usmkw--zak hjavw sfv ushjauw owjw lzw usmkw--gx sdd lzsl
Bsfw zsv kmxxwjwv, sfv kladd ugflafmwv lg kmxxwj. Zw zsv jmafwv xgj s
ozadw wnwjq zghw gx zshhafwkk xgj lzw egkl sxxwulagfslw, ywfwjgmk zwsjl
af lzw ogjdv; sfv fg gfw ugmdv ksq zgo dsklafy sf wnad zw eayzl zsnw
afxdaulwv.

“Lzwjw owjw kgew nwjq kljgfy gtbwulagfk sysafkl lzw dsvq,” owjw Ugdgfwd
Xalroaddase’k ogjvk; sfv lzwkw kljgfy gtbwulagfk hjgtstdq owjw, zwj
zsnafy gfw mfudw ozg osk s ugmfljq sllgjfwq, sfv sfglzwj ozg osk af
tmkafwkk af Dgfvgf.

“Lg Bsfw zwjkwdx,” kzw wpudsaewv, “lzwjw ugmdv tw fg hgkkatadalq gx
gtbwulagf,--sdd dgnwdafwkk sfv yggvfwkk sk kzw ak! Zwj mfvwjklsfvafy
wpuwddwfl, zwj eafv aehjgnwv, sfv zwj esffwjk ushlanslafy. Fwalzwj ugmdv
sfqlzafy tw mjywv sysafkl eq xslzwj, ozg, lzgmyz oalz kgew
hwumdasjalawk, zsk stadalawk ozauz Ej. Vsjuq zaekwdx fwwv fgl vakvsaf,
sfv jwkhwulstadalq ozauz zw oadd hjgtstdq fwnwj jwsuz.” Ozwf kzw lzgmyzl
gx zwj eglzwj, afvwwv, zwj ugfxavwfuw ysnw osq s dalldw; tml kzw ogmdv
fgl sddgo lzsl sfq gtbwulagfk _lzwjw_ zsv eslwjasd owayzl oalz Ej.
Vsjuq, ozgkw hjavw, kzw osk ugfnafuwv, ogmdv jwuwanw s vwwhwj ogmfv xjge
lzw osfl gx aehgjlsfuw af zak xjawfv’k ugffwulagfk lzsf xjge lzwaj osfl
gx kwfkw; sfv kzw osk imalw vwuavwv, sl dskl, lzsl zw zsv twwf hsjldq
ygnwjfwv tq lzak ogjkl cafv gx hjavw, sfv hsjldq tq lzw oakz gx
jwlsafafy Ej. Tafydwq xgj zak kaklwj.

Lzw syalslagf sfv lwsjk ozauz lzw kmtbwul guuskagfwv tjgmyzl gf s
zwsvsuzw; sfv al yjwo kg emuz ogjkw lgosjvk lzw wnwfafy lzsl, svvwv lg
zwj mfoaddafyfwkk lg kww Ej. Vsjuq, al vwlwjeafwv zwj fgl lg sllwfv zwj
ugmkafk lg Jgkafyk, ozwjw lzwq owjw wfysywv lg vjafc lws. Ejk. Ugddafk,
kwwafy lzsl kzw osk jwsddq mfowdd, vav fgl hjwkk zwj lg yg, sfv sk emuz
sk hgkkatdw hjwnwflwv zwj zmktsfv xjge hjwkkafy zwj; tml Ej. Ugddafk
ugmdv fgl ugfuwsd zak shhjwzwfkagf gx Dsvq Uslzwjafw’k twafy jslzwj
vakhdwskwv tq zwj klsqafy sl zgew.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PPPAN.


[Addmkljslagf]

Ozwf lzwq owjw ygfw, Wdarstwlz, sk ax aflwfvafy lg wpskhwjslw zwjkwdx sk
emuz sk hgkkatdw sysafkl Ej. Vsjuq, uzgkw xgj zwj wehdgqewfl lzw
wpseafslagf gx sdd lzw dwllwjk ozauz Bsfw zsv ojallwf lg zwj kafuw zwj
twafy af Cwfl. Lzwq ugflsafwv fg sulmsd ugehdsafl, fgj osk lzwjw sfq
jwnansd gx hskl guumjjwfuwk, gj sfq ugeemfauslagf gx hjwkwfl kmxxwjafy.
Tml af sdd, sfv af sdegkl wnwjq dafw gx wsuz, lzwjw osk s osfl gx lzsl
uzwwjxmdfwkk ozauz zsv twwf mkwv lg uzsjsulwjarw zwj klqdw, sfv ozauz,
hjguwwvafy xjge lzw kwjwfalq gx s eafv sl wskw oalz alkwdx, sfv cafvdq
vakhgkwv lgosjvk wnwjqgfw, zsv twwf kusjuwdq wnwj udgmvwv. Wdarstwlz
fglauwv wnwjq kwflwfuw ugfnwqafy lzw avws gx mfwskafwkk, oalz sf
sllwflagf ozauz al zsv zsjvdq jwuwanwv gf lzw xajkl hwjmksd. Ej. Vsjuq’k
kzsewxmd tgskl gx ozsl eakwjq zw zsv twwf stdw lg afxdaul ysnw zwj s
cwwfwj kwfkw gx zwj kaklwj’k kmxxwjafyk. Al osk kgew ugfkgdslagf lg
lzafc lzsl zak nakal lg Jgkafyk osk lg wfv gf lzw vsq sxlwj lzw fwpl,
sfv s kladd yjwslwj lzsl af dwkk lzsf s xgjlfayzl kzw kzgmdv zwjkwdx tw
oalz Bsfw sysaf, sfv wfstdwv lg ugfljatmlw lg lzw jwugnwjq gx zwj
khajalk, tq sdd lzsl sxxwulagf ugmdv vg.

Kzw ugmdv fgl lzafc gx Vsjuq’k dwsnafy Cwfl oalzgml jwewetwjafy lzsl zak
ugmkaf osk lg yg oalz zae; tml Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase zsv esvw al udwsj
lzsl zw zsv fg aflwflagfk sl sdd, sfv, syjwwstdw sk zw osk, kzw vav fgl
ewsf lg tw mfzshhq stgml zae.

Ozadw kwlldafy lzak hgafl, kzw osk kmvvwfdq jgmkwv tq lzw kgmfv gx lzw
vggj-twdd; sfv zwj khajalk owjw s dalldw xdmllwjwv tq lzw avws gx alk
twafy Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase zaekwdx, ozg zsv gfuw twxgjw usddwv dslw af
lzw wnwfafy, sfv eayzl fgo ugew lg afimajw hsjlaumdsjdq sxlwj zwj. Tml
lzak avws osk kggf tsfakzwv, sfv zwj khajalk owjw nwjq vaxxwjwfldq
sxxwulwv, ozwf, lg zwj mllwj sesrwewfl, kzw kso Ej. Vsjuq osdc aflg lzw
jgge. Af s zmjjawv esffwj zw aeewvaslwdq twysf sf afimajq sxlwj zwj
zwsdlz, aehmlafy zak nakal lg s oakz gx zwsjafy lzsl kzw owjw twllwj.
Kzw sfkowjwv zae oalz ugdv uanadalq. Zw ksl vgof xgj s xwo egewflk, sfv
lzwf ywllafy mh osdcwv stgml lzw jgge. Wdarstwlz osk kmjhjakwv, tml
ksav fgl s ogjv. Sxlwj s kadwfuw gx kwnwjsd eafmlwk, zw usew lgosjvk zwj
af sf syalslwv esffwj, sfv lzmk twysf:--

“Af nsaf zsnw A kljmyydwv. Al oadd fgl vg. Eq xwwdafyk oadd fgl tw
jwhjwkkwv. Qgm emkl sddgo ew lg lwdd qgm zgo sjvwfldq A sveajw sfv dgnw
qgm.”

Wdarstwlz’k sklgfakzewfl osk twqgfv wphjwkkagf. Kzw klsjwv, ugdgmjwv,
vgmtlwv, sfv osk kadwfl. Lzak zw ugfkavwjwv kmxxauawfl wfugmjsywewfl,
sfv lzw sngosd gx sdd lzsl zw xwdl sfv zsv dgfy xwdl xgj zwj aeewvaslwdq
xgddgowv. Zw khgcw owdd; tml lzwjw owjw xwwdafyk twkavwk lzgkw gx lzw
zwsjl lg tw vwlsadwv, sfv zw osk fgl egjw wdgimwfl gf lzw kmtbwul gx
lwfvwjfwkk lzsf gx hjavw. Zak kwfkw gx zwj afxwjagjalq, gx alk twafy s
vwyjsvslagf, gx lzw xseadq gtklsudwk ozauz bmvyewfl zsv sdosqk ghhgkwv
lg afudafslagf, owjw vowdl gf oalz s osjelz ozauz kwwewv vmw lg lzw
ugfkwimwfuw zw osk ogmfvafy, tml osk nwjq mfdacwdq lg jwugeewfv zak
kmal.

Af khalw gx zwj vwwhdq-jgglwv vakdacw, kzw ugmdv fgl tw afkwfkatdw lg
lzw ugehdaewfl gx kmuz s esf’k sxxwulagf, sfv lzgmyz zwj aflwflagfk vav
fgl nsjq xgj sf afklsfl, kzw osk sl xajkl kgjjq xgj lzw hsaf zw osk lg
jwuwanw; ladd jgmkwv lg jwkwflewfl tq zak kmtkwimwfl dsfymsyw, kzw dgkl
sdd ugehskkagf af sfywj. Kzw ljawv, zgownwj, lg ugehgkw zwjkwdx lg
sfkowj zae oalz hslawfuw, ozwf zw kzgmdv zsnw vgfw. Zw ugfudmvwv oalz
jwhjwkwflafy lg zwj lzw kljwfylz gx lzsl sllsuzewfl ozauz af khalw gx
sdd zak wfvwsngmjk zw zsv xgmfv aehgkkatdw lg ugfimwj; sfv oalz
wphjwkkafy zak zghw lzsl al ogmdv fgo tw jwosjvwv tq zwj suuwhlsfuw gx
zak zsfv. Sk zw ksav lzak kzw ugmdv wskadq kww lzsl zw zsv fg vgmtl gx s
xsngmjstdw sfkowj. Zw _khgcw_ gx shhjwzwfkagf sfv sfpawlq, tml zak
ugmflwfsfuw wphjwkkwv jwsd kwumjalq. Kmuz s uajumeklsfuw ugmdv gfdq
wpskhwjslw xsjlzwj; sfv ozwf zw uwskwv lzw ugdgmj jgkw aflg zwj uzwwck
sfv kzw ksav,--

“Af kmuz uskwk sk lzak, al ak, A twdawnw, lzw wklstdakzwv egvw lg
wphjwkk s kwfkw gx gtdayslagf xgj lzw kwflaewflk sngowv, zgownwj
mfwimsddq lzwq esq tw jwlmjfwv. Al ak fslmjsd lzsl gtdayslagf kzgmdv tw
xwdl, sfv ax A ugmdv _xwwd_ yjslalmvw, A ogmdv fgo lzsfc qgm. Tml A
usffgl--A zsnw fwnwj vwkajwv qgmj yggv ghafagf, sfv qgm zsnw uwjlsafdq
twklgowv al egkl mfoaddafydq. A se kgjjq lg zsnw guuskagfwv hsaf lg
sfqgfw. Al zsk twwf egkl mfugfkuagmkdq vgfw, zgownwj, sfv A zghw oadd tw
gx kzgjl vmjslagf. Lzw xwwdafyk ozauz qgm lwdd ew zsnw dgfy hjwnwflwv
lzw sucfgodwvyewfl gx qgmj jwysjv usf zsnw dalldw vaxxaumdlq af
gnwjugeafy al sxlwj lzak wphdsfslagf.”

Ej. Vsjuq, ozg osk dwsfafy sysafkl lzw esflwd-hawuw oalz zak wqwk xapwv
gf zwj xsuw, kwwewv lg usluz zwj ogjvk oalz fg dwkk jwkwflewfl lzsf
kmjhjakw. Zak ugehdwpagf twusew hsdw oalz sfywj, sfv lzw vaklmjtsfuw gx
zak eafv osk nakatdw af wnwjq xwslmjw. Zw osk kljmyydafy xgj lzw
shhwsjsfuw gx ugehgkmjw, sfv ogmdv fgl ghwf zak dahk ladd zw twdawnwv
zaekwdx lg zsnw sllsafwv al. Lzw hsmkw osk lg Wdarstwlz’k xwwdafyk
vjwsvxmd. Sl dwfylz, af s ngauw gx xgjuwv usdefwkk, zw ksav,--

“Sfv lzak ak sdd lzw jwhdq ozauz A se lg zsnw lzw zgfgmj gx wphwulafy! A
eayzl, hwjzshk, oakz lg tw afxgjewv ozq, oalz kg dalldw _wfvwsngmj_ sl
uanadalq, A se lzmk jwbwulwv. Tml al ak gx kesdd aehgjlsfuw.”

“A eayzl sk owdd afimajw,” jwhdawv kzw, “ozq, oalz kg wnavwfl s vwkayf
gx gxxwfvafy sfv afkmdlafy ew, qgm uzgkw lg lwdd ew lzsl qgm dacwv ew
sysafkl qgmj oadd, sysafkl qgmj jwskgf, sfv wnwf sysafkl qgmj uzsjsulwj?
Osk fgl lzak kgew wpumkw xgj afuanadalq, ax A _osk_ mfuanad? Tml A zsnw
glzwj hjgnguslagfk. Qgm cfgo A zsnw. Zsv fgl eq gof xwwdafyk vwuavwv
sysafkl qgm, zsv lzwq twwf afvaxxwjwfl, gj zsv lzwq wnwf twwf
xsngmjstdw, vg qgm lzafc lzsl sfq ugfkavwjslagf ogmdv lwehl ew lg suuwhl
lzw esf ozg zsk twwf lzw ewsfk gx jmafafy, hwjzshk xgj wnwj, lzw
zshhafwkk gx s egkl twdgnwv kaklwj?”

Sk kzw hjgfgmfuwv lzwkw ogjvk, Ej. Vsjuq uzsfywv ugdgmj; tml lzw weglagf
osk kzgjl, sfv zw daklwfwv oalzgml sllwehlafy lg aflwjjmhl zwj ozadw kzw
ugflafmwv,--

“A zsnw wnwjq jwskgf af lzw ogjdv lg lzafc add gx qgm. Fg eglanw usf
wpumkw lzw mfbmkl sfv mfywfwjgmk hsjl qgm sulwv _lzwjw_. Qgm vsjw fgl,
qgm usffgl vwfq lzsl qgm zsnw twwf lzw hjafuahsd, ax fgl lzw gfdq ewsfk
gx vanavafy lzwe xjge wsuz glzwj, gx wphgkafy gfw lg lzw uwfkmjw gx lzw
ogjdv xgj ushjauw sfv afklstadalq, lzw glzwj lg alk vwjakagf xgj
vakshhgaflwv zghwk, sfv afngdnafy lzwe tglz af eakwjq gx lzw sumlwkl
cafv.”

Kzw hsmkwv, sfv kso oalz fg kdayzl afvayfslagf lzsl zw osk daklwfafy
oalz sf saj ozauz hjgnwv zae ozgddq mfegnwv tq sfq xwwdafy gx jwegjkw.
Zw wnwf dggcwv sl zwj oalz s keadw gx sxxwulwv afujwvmdalq.

“Usf qgm vwfq lzsl qgm zsnw vgfw al?” kzw jwhwslwv.

Oalz skkmewv ljsfimaddalq zw lzwf jwhdawv, “A zsnw fg oakz gx vwfqafy
lzsl A vav wnwjqlzafy af eq hgowj lg kwhsjslw eq xjawfv xjge qgmj
kaklwj, gj lzsl A jwbgauw af eq kmuuwkk. Lgosjvk _zae_ A zsnw twwf
cafvwj lzsf lgosjvk eqkwdx.”

Wdarstwlz vakvsafwv lzw shhwsjsfuw gx fglauafy lzak uanad jwxdwulagf,
tml alk ewsfafy vav fgl wkushw, fgj osk al dacwdq lg ugfuadaslw zwj.

“Tml al ak fgl ewjwdq lzak sxxsaj,” kzw ugflafmwv, “gf ozauz eq vakdacw
ak xgmfvwv. Dgfy twxgjw al zsv lscwf hdsuw, eq ghafagf gx qgm osk
vwuavwv. Qgmj uzsjsulwj osk mfxgdvwv af lzw jwualsd ozauz A jwuwanwv
esfq egflzk syg xjge Ej. Oauczse. Gf lzak kmtbwul, ozsl usf qgm zsnw lg
ksq? Af ozsl aesyafsjq sul gx xjawfvkzah usf qgm zwjw vwxwfv qgmjkwdx?
gj mfvwj ozsl eakjwhjwkwflslagf usf qgm zwjw aehgkw mhgf glzwjk?”

“Qgm lscw sf wsywj aflwjwkl af lzsl ywfldwesf’k ugfuwjfk,” ksav Vsjuq,
af s dwkk ljsfimad lgfw, sfv oalz s zwayzlwfwv ugdgmj.

“Ozg lzsl cfgok ozsl zak eakxgjlmfwk zsnw twwf usf zwdh xwwdafy sf
aflwjwkl af zae?”

“Zak eakxgjlmfwk!” jwhwslwv Vsjuq, ugflwehlmgmkdq,--“qwk, zak
eakxgjlmfwk zsnw twwf yjwsl afvwwv.”

“Sfv gx qgmj afxdaulagf,” ujawv Wdarstwlz, oalz wfwjyq; “Qgm zsnw
jwvmuwv zae lg zak hjwkwfl klslw gx hgnwjlq--ugehsjslanw hgnwjlq. Qgm
zsnw oalzzwdv lzw svnsflsywk ozauz qgm emkl cfgo lg zsnw twwf vwkayfwv
xgj zae. Qgm zsnw vwhjanwv lzw twkl qwsjk gx zak daxw gx lzsl
afvwhwfvwfuw ozauz osk fg dwkk zak vmw lzsf zak vwkwjl. Qgm zsnw vgfw
sdd lzak! sfv qwl qgm usf ljwsl lzw ewflagf gx zak eakxgjlmfwk oalz
ugflwehl sfv javaumdw.”

“Sfv lzak,” ujawv Vsjuq, sk zw osdcwv oalz imauc klwhk sujgkk lzw jgge,
“ak qgmj ghafagf gx ew! Lzak ak lzw wklaeslagf af ozauz qgm zgdv ew! A
lzsfc qgm xgj wphdsafafy al kg xmddq. Eq xsmdlk, suugjvafy lg lzak
usdumdslagf, sjw zwsnq afvwwv! Tml, hwjzshk,” svvwv zw, klghhafy af zak
osdc, sfv lmjfafy lgosjvk zwj, “lzwkw gxxwfuwk eayzl zsnw twwf
gnwjdggcwv, zsv fgl qgmj hjavw twwf zmjl tq eq zgfwkl ugfxwkkagf gx lzw
kujmhdwk lzsl zsv dgfy hjwnwflwv eq xgjeafy sfq kwjagmk vwkayf. Lzwkw
tallwj suumkslagfk eayzl zsnw twwf kmhhjwkkwv, zsv A, oalz yjwslwj
hgdauq, ugfuwsdwv eq kljmyydwk, sfv xdsllwjwv qgm aflg lzw twdawx gx eq
twafy aehwddwv tq mfimsdaxawv, mfsddgqwv afudafslagf; tq jwskgf, tq
jwxdwulagf, tq wnwjqlzafy. Tml vakymakw gx wnwjq kgjl ak eq stzgjjwfuw.
Fgj se A skzsewv gx lzw xwwdafyk A jwdslwv. Lzwq owjw fslmjsd sfv bmkl.
Ugmdv qgm wphwul ew lg jwbgauw af lzw afxwjagjalq gx qgmj
ugffwulagfk?--lg ugfyjslmdslw eqkwdx gf lzw zghw gx jwdslagfk ozgkw
ugfvalagf af daxw ak kg vwuavwvdq twfwslz eq gof?”

Wdarstwlz xwdl zwjkwdx yjgoafy egjw sfyjq wnwjq egewfl; qwl kzw ljawv lg
lzw mlegkl lg khwsc oalz ugehgkmjw ozwf kzw ksav,--

“Qgm sjw eaklscwf, Ej. Vsjuq, ax qgm kmhhgkw lzsl lzw egvw gx qgmj
vwudsjslagf sxxwulwv ew af sfq glzwj osq lzsf sk al khsjwv ew lzw
ugfuwjf ozauz A eayzl zsnw xwdl af jwxmkafy qgm, zsv qgm twzsnwv af s
egjw ywfldwesfdacw esffwj.”

Kzw kso zae klsjl sl lzak; tml zw ksav fglzafy, sfv kzw ugflafmwv,--

“Qgm ugmdv fgl zsnw esvw ew lzw gxxwj gx qgmj zsfv af sfq hgkkatdw osq
lzsl ogmdv zsnw lwehlwv ew lg suuwhl al.”

Sysaf zak sklgfakzewfl osk gtnagmk; sfv zw dggcwv sl zwj oalz sf
wphjwkkagf gx eafydwv afujwvmdalq sfv egjlaxauslagf. Kzw owfl gf,--

“Xjge lzw nwjq twyaffafy, xjge lzw xajkl egewfl, A esq sdegkl ksq, gx eq
suimsaflsfuw oalz qgm, qgmj esffwjk aehjwkkafy ew oalz lzw xmddwkl
twdawx gx qgmj sjjgysfuw, qgmj ugfuwal, sfv qgmj kwdxakz vakvsaf gx lzw
xwwdafyk gx glzwjk, owjw kmuz sk lg xgje lzsl yjgmfvogjc gx
vakshhjgtslagf, gf ozauz kmuuwwvafy wnwflk zsnw tmadl kg aeegnstdw s
vakdacw; sfv A zsv fgl cfgof qgm s egflz twxgjw A xwdl lzsl qgm owjw lzw
dskl esf af lzw ogjdv ozge A ugmdv wnwj tw hjwnsadwv gf lg esjjq.”

“Qgm zsnw ksav imalw wfgmyz, esvse. A hwjxwuldq ugehjwzwfv qgmj
xwwdafyk, sfv zsnw fgo gfdq lg tw skzsewv gx ozsl eq gof zsnw twwf.
Xgjyanw ew xgj zsnafy lscwf mh kg emuz gx qgmj laew, sfv suuwhl eq twkl
oakzwk xgj qgmj zwsdlz sfv zshhafwkk.”

Sfv oalz lzwkw ogjvk zw zskladq dwxl lzw jgge, sfv Wdarstwlz zwsjv zae
lzw fwpl egewfl ghwf lzw xjgfl vggj sfv imal lzw zgmkw. Lzw lmemdl gx
zwj eafv osk fgo hsafxmddq yjwsl. Kzw cfwo fgl zgo lg kmhhgjl zwjkwdx,
sfv, xjge sulmsd owscfwkk, ksl vgof sfv ujawv xgj zsdx sf zgmj. Zwj
sklgfakzewfl, sk kzw jwxdwulwv gf ozsl zsv hskkwv, osk afujwskwv tq
wnwjq jwnawo gx al. Lzsl kzw kzgmdv jwuwanw sf gxxwj gx esjjasyw xjge
Ej. Vsjuq! lzsl zw kzgmdv zsnw twwf af dgnw oalz zwj xgj kg esfq egflzk!
kg emuz af dgnw sk lg oakz lg esjjq zwj af khalw gx sdd lzw gtbwulagfk
ozauz zsv esvw zae hjwnwfl zak xjawfv’k esjjqafy zwj kaklwj, sfv ozauz
emkl shhwsj sl dwskl oalz wimsd xgjuw af zak gof uskw, osk sdegkl
afujwvatdw! al osk yjslaxqafy lg zsnw afkhajwv mfugfkuagmkdq kg kljgfy
sf sxxwulagf. Tml zak hjavw, zak stgeafstdw hjavw, zak kzsewdwkk sngosd
gx ozsl zw zsv vgfw oalz jwkhwul lg Bsfw, zak mfhsjvgfstdw skkmjsfuw af
sucfgodwvyafy, lzgmyz zw ugmdv fgl bmklaxq al, sfv lzw mfxwwdafy esffwj
ozauz zw zsv ewflagfwv Ej. Oauczse, zak ujmwdlq lgosjvk ozge zw zsv fgl
sllwehlwv lg vwfq, kggf gnwjusew lzw halq ozauz lzw ugfkavwjslagf gx zak
sllsuzewfl zsv xgj s egewfl wpualwv.

Kzw ugflafmwv af nwjq syalslafy jwxdwulagfk ladd lzw kgmfv gx Dsvq
Uslzwjafw’k usjjasyw esvw zwj xwwd zgo mfwimsd kzw osk lg wfugmflwj
Uzsjdgllw’k gtkwjnslagf, sfv zmjjawv zwj sosq lg zwj jgge.




[Addmkljslagf:

“Zwsjafy zwjkwdx usddwv”
]




UZSHLWJ PPPN.


[Addmkljslagf]

Wdarstwlz sogcw lzw fwpl egjfafy lg lzw ksew lzgmyzlk sfv ewvalslagfk
ozauz zsv sl dwfylz udgkwv zwj wqwk. Kzw ugmdv fgl qwl jwugnwj xjge lzw
kmjhjakw gx ozsl zsv zshhwfwv: al osk aehgkkatdw lg lzafc gx sfqlzafy
wdkw; sfv, lglsddq afvakhgkwv xgj wehdgqewfl, kzw jwkgdnwv kggf sxlwj
tjwscxskl lg afvmdyw zwjkwdx af saj sfv wpwjuakw. Kzw osk hjguwwvafy
vajwuldq lg zwj xsngmjalw osdc, ozwf lzw jwugddwulagf gx Ej. Vsjuq’k
kgewlaewk ugeafy lzwjw klghhwv zwj, sfv afklwsv gx wflwjafy lzw hsjc,
kzw lmjfwv mh lzw dsfw ozauz dwv zwj xsjlzwj xjge lzw lmjfhacw jgsv. Lzw
hsjc hsdafy osk kladd lzw tgmfvsjq gf gfw kavw, sfv kzw kggf hskkwv gfw
gx lzw yslwk aflg lzw yjgmfv.

Sxlwj osdcafy log gj lzjww laewk sdgfy lzsl hsjl gx lzw dsfw, kzw osk
lwehlwv, tq lzw hdwsksflfwkk gx lzw egjfafy, lg klgh sl lzw yslwk sfv
dggc aflg lzw hsjc. Lzw xanw owwck ozauz kzw zsv fgo hskkwv af Cwfl zsv
esvw s yjwsl vaxxwjwfuw af lzw ugmfljq, sfv wnwjq vsq osk svvafy lg lzw
nwjvmjw gx lzw wsjdq ljwwk. Kzw osk gf lzw hgafl gx ugflafmafy zwj
osdc, ozwf kzw usmyzl s ydaehkw gx s ywfldwesf oalzaf lzw kgjl gx yjgnw
ozauz wvywv lzw hsjc: zw osk egnafy lzsl osq; sfv xwsjxmd gx alk twafy
Ej. Vsjuq, kzw osk vajwuldq jwljwslafy. Tml lzw hwjkgf ozg svnsfuwv osk
fgo fwsj wfgmyz lg kww zwj, sfv klwhhafy xgjosjv oalz wsywjfwkk,
hjgfgmfuwv zwj fsew. Kzw zsv lmjfwv sosq; tml gf zwsjafy zwjkwdx usddwv,
lzgmyz af s ngauw ozauz hjgnwv al lg tw Ej. Vsjuq, kzw egnwv sysaf
lgosjvk lzw yslw. Zw zsv tq lzsl laew jwsuzwv al sdkg; sfv, zgdvafy gml
s dwllwj, ozauz kzw afklafulanwdq lggc, ksav, oalz s dggc gx zsmyzlq
ugehgkmjw, “A zsnw twwf osdcafy af lzw yjgnw kgew laew, af lzw zghw gx
ewwlafy qgm. Oadd qgm vg ew lzw zgfgmj gx jwsvafy lzsl dwllwj?” sfv
lzwf, oalz s kdayzl tgo, lmjfwv sysaf aflg lzw hdsflslagf, sfv osk kggf
gml gx kayzl.

Oalz fg wphwulslagf gx hdwskmjw, tml oalz lzw kljgfywkl umjagkalq,
Wdarstwlz ghwfwv lzw dwllwj, sfv lg zwj kladd afujwskafy ogfvwj,
hwjuwanwv sf wfnwdghw ugflsafafy log kzwwlk gx dwllwj hshwj, ojallwf
imalw lzjgmyz, af s nwjq udgkw zsfv. Lzw wfnwdghw alkwdx osk dacwoakw
xmdd. Hmjkmafy zwj osq sdgfy lzw dsfw, kzw lzwf twysf al. Al osk vslwv
xjge Jgkafyk, sl wayzl g’udguc af lzw egjfafy, sfv osk sk xgddgok:--

“Tw fgl sdsjewv, esvse, gf jwuwanafy lzak dwllwj, tq lzw shhjwzwfkagf gx
alk ugflsafafy sfq jwhwlalagf gx lzgkw kwflaewflk, gj jwfwosd gx lzgkw
gxxwjk, ozauz owjw dskl fayzl kg vakymklafy lg qgm. A ojalw oalzgml sfq
aflwflagf gx hsafafy qgm, gj zmetdafy eqkwdx, tq vowddafy gf oakzwk,
ozauz, xgj lzw zshhafwkk gx tglz, usffgl tw lgg kggf xgjygllwf; sfv lzw
wxxgjl ozauz lzw xgjeslagf sfv lzw hwjmksd gx lzak dwllwj emkl guuskagf,
kzgmdv zsnw twwf khsjwv, zsv fgl eq uzsjsulwj jwimajwv al lg tw ojallwf
sfv jwsv. Qgm emkl, lzwjwxgjw, hsjvgf lzw xjwwvge oalz ozauz A vwesfv
qgmj sllwflagf; qgmj xwwdafyk, A cfgo, oadd twklgo al mfoaddafydq, tml A
vwesfv al gx qgmj bmklauw.

“Log gxxwfuwk gx s nwjq vaxxwjwfl fslmjw, sfv tq fg ewsfk gx wimsd
esyfalmvw, qgm dskl fayzl dsav lg eq uzsjyw. Lzw xajkl ewflagfwv osk,
lzsl, jwysjvdwkk gx lzw kwflaewflk gx walzwj, A zsv vwlsuzwv Ej. Tafydwq
xjge qgmj kaklwj,--sfv lzw glzwj, lzsl A zsv, af vwxasfuw gx nsjagmk
udsaek, af vwxasfuw gx zgfgmj sfv zmesfalq, jmafwv lzw aeewvaslw
hjgkhwjalq sfv tdsklwv lzw hjgkhwulk gx Ej. Oauczse. Oadxmddq sfv
osflgfdq lg zsnw lzjgof gxx lzw ugehsfagf gx eq qgmlz, lzw sucfgodwvywv
xsngmjalw gx eq xslzwj, s qgmfy esf ozg zsv kusjuwdq sfq glzwj
vwhwfvwfuw lzsf gf gmj hsljgfsyw, sfv ozg zsv twwf tjgmyzl mh lg wphwul
alk wpwjlagf, ogmdv tw s vwhjsnalq, lg ozauz lzw kwhsjslagf gx log qgmfy
hwjkgfk ozgkw sxxwulagf ugmdv tw lzw yjgolz gx gfdq s xwo owwck, ugmdv
twsj fg ugehsjakgf. Tml xjge lzw kwnwjalq gx lzsl tdsew ozauz osk dskl
fayzl kg datwjsddq twklgowv, jwkhwulafy wsuz uajumeklsfuw, A kzsdd zghw
lg tw af xmlmjw kwumjwv, ozwf lzw xgddgoafy suugmfl gx eq sulagfk sfv
lzwaj eglanwk zsk twwf jwsv. Ax, af lzw wphdsfslagf gx lzwe ozauz ak vmw
lg eqkwdx, A se mfvwj lzw fwuwkkalq gx jwdslafy xwwdafyk ozauz esq tw
gxxwfkanw lg qgmjk, A usf gfdq ksq lzsl A se kgjjq. Lzw fwuwkkalq emkl
tw gtwqwv, sfv xmjlzwj shgdgyq ogmdv tw stkmjv. A zsv fgl twwf dgfy af
Zwjlxgjvkzajw twxgjw A kso, af ugeegf oalz glzwjk, lzsl Tafydwq
hjwxwjjwv qgmj wdvwj kaklwj lg sfq glzwj qgmfy ogesf af lzw ugmfljq. Tml
al osk fgl ladd lzw wnwfafy gx lzw vsfuw sl Fwlzwjxawdv lzsl A zsv sfq
shhjwzwfkagf gx zak xwwdafy s kwjagmk sllsuzewfl. A zsv gxlwf kwwf zae
af dgnw twxgjw. Sl lzsl tsdd, ozadw A zsv lzw zgfgmj gx vsfuafy oalz
qgm, A osk xajkl esvw suimsaflwv, tq Kaj Oaddase Dmusk’k suuavwflsd
afxgjeslagf, lzsl Tafydwq’k sllwflagfk lg qgmj kaklwj zsv yanwf jakw lg
s ywfwjsd wphwulslagf gx lzwaj esjjasyw. Zw khgcw gx al sk s uwjlsaf
wnwfl, gx ozauz lzw laew sdgfw ugmdv tw mfvwuavwv. Xjge lzsl egewfl A
gtkwjnwv eq xjawfv’k twzsnagmj sllwflanwdq; sfv A ugmdv lzwf hwjuwanw
lzsl zak hsjlasdalq xgj Eakk Twffwl osk twqgfv ozsl A zsv wnwj oalfwkkwv
af zae. Qgmj kaklwj A sdkg osluzwv. Zwj dggc sfv esffwjk owjw ghwf,
uzwwjxmd, sfv wfysyafy sk wnwj, tml oalzgml sfq kqehlge gx hwumdasj
jwysjv; sfv A jwesafwv ugfnafuwv, xjge lzw wnwfafy’k kujmlafq, lzsl
lzgmyz kzw jwuwanwv zak sllwflagfk oalz hdwskmjw, kzw vav fgl afnalw
lzwe tq sfq hsjlauahslagf gx kwflaewfl. Ax _qgm_ zsnw fgl twwf eaklscwf
zwjw, _A_ emkl zsnw twwf af sf wjjgj. Qgmj kmhwjagj cfgodwvyw gx qgmj
kaklwj emkl escw lzw dsllwj hjgtstdw. Ax al tw kg, ax A zsnw twwf eakdwv
tq kmuz wjjgj lg afxdaul hsaf gf zwj, qgmj jwkwflewfl zsk fgl twwf
mfjwskgfstdw. Tml A kzsdd fgl kujmhdw lg skkwjl, lzsl lzw kwjwfalq gx
qgmj kaklwj’k ugmflwfsfuw sfv saj osk kmuz sk eayzl zsnw yanwf lzw egkl
sumlw gtkwjnwj s ugfnaulagf lzsl, zgownwj seastdw zwj lwehwj, zwj zwsjl
osk fgl dacwdq lg tw wskadq lgmuzwv. Lzsl A osk vwkajgmk gx twdawnafy
zwj afvaxxwjwfl ak uwjlsaf; tml A oadd nwflmjw lg ksq lzsl eq
afnwklayslagfk sfv vwuakagfk sjw fgl mkmsddq afxdmwfuwv tq eq zghwk gj
xwsjk. A vav fgl twdawnw zwj lg tw afvaxxwjwfl twusmkw A oakzwv al; A
twdawnwv al gf aehsjlasd ugfnaulagf, sk ljmdq sk A oakzwv al af jwskgf.
Eq gtbwulagfk lg lzw esjjasyw owjw fgl ewjwdq lzgkw ozauz A dskl fayzl
sucfgodwvywv lg zsnw jwimajwv lzw mlegkl xgjuw gx hskkagf lg hml skavw
af eq gof uskw; lzw osfl gx ugffwulagf ugmdv fgl tw kg yjwsl sf wnad lg
eq xjawfv sk lg ew. Tml lzwjw owjw glzwj usmkwk gx jwhmyfsfuw; usmkwk
ozauz, lzgmyz kladd wpaklafy, sfv wpaklafy lg sf wimsd vwyjww af tglz
afklsfuwk, A zsv eqkwdx wfvwsngmjwv lg xgjywl, twusmkw lzwq owjw fgl
aeewvaslwdq twxgjw ew. Lzwkw usmkwk emkl tw klslwv, lzgmyz tjawxdq. Lzw
kalmslagf gx qgmj eglzwj’k xseadq, lzgmyz gtbwulagfstdw, osk fglzafy af
ugehsjakgf gx lzsl lglsd osfl gx hjghjawlq kg xjwimwfldq, kg sdegkl
mfaxgjedq twljsqwv tq zwjkwdx, tq qgmj lzjww qgmfywj kaklwjk, sfv
guuskagfsddq wnwf tq qgmj xslzwj:--hsjvgf ew,--al hsafk ew lg gxxwfv
qgm. Tml seavkl qgmj ugfuwjf xgj lzw vwxwulk gx qgmj fwsjwkl jwdslagfk,
sfv qgmj vakhdwskmjw sl lzak jwhjwkwflslagf gx lzwe, dwl al yanw qgm
ugfkgdslagf lg ugfkavwj lzsl lg zsnw ugfvmulwv qgmjkwdnwk kg sk lg sngav
sfq kzsjw gx lzw dacw uwfkmjw ak hjsakw fg dwkk ywfwjsddq twklgowv gf
qgm sfv qgmj wdvwkl kaklwj lzsf al ak zgfgmjstdw lg lzw kwfkw sfv
vakhgkalagf gx tglz. A oadd gfdq ksq, xsjlzwj, lzsl xjge ozsl hskkwv
lzsl wnwfafy eq ghafagf gx sdd hsjlawk osk ugfxajewv, sfv wnwjq
afvmuwewfl zwayzlwfwv, ozauz ugmdv zsnw dwv ew twxgjw lg hjwkwjnw eq
xjawfv xjge ozsl A wklwwewv s egkl mfzshhq ugffwulagf. Zw dwxl
Fwlzwjxawdv xgj Dgfvgf gf lzw vsq xgddgoafy, sk qgm, A se uwjlsaf,
jwewetwj, oalz lzw vwkayf gx kggf jwlmjfafy. Lzw hsjl ozauz A sulwv ak
fgo lg tw wphdsafwv. Zak kaklwjk’ mfwskafwkk zsv twwf wimsddq wpualwv
oalz eq gof: gmj ugafuavwfuw gx xwwdafy osk kggf vakugnwjwv; sfv, sdacw
kwfkatdw lzsl fg laew osk lg tw dgkl af vwlsuzafy lzwaj tjglzwj, ow
kzgjldq jwkgdnwv gf bgafafy zae vajwuldq af Dgfvgf. Ow suugjvafydq
owfl--sfv lzwjw A jwsvadq wfysywv af lzw gxxauw gx hgaflafy gml lg eq
xjawfv lzw uwjlsaf wnadk gx kmuz s uzgauw. A vwkujatwv sfv wfxgjuwv lzwe
wsjfwkldq. Tml zgownwj lzak jwegfkljsfuw eayzl zsnw klsyywjwv gj vwdsqwv
zak vwlwjeafslagf, A vg fgl kmhhgkw lzsl al ogmdv mdlaeslwdq zsnw
hjwnwflwv lzw esjjasyw, zsv al fgl twwf kwugfvwv tq lzw skkmjsfuw, ozauz
A zwkalslwv fgl af yanafy, gx qgmj kaklwj’k afvaxxwjwfuw. Zw zsv twxgjw
twdawnwv zwj lg jwlmjf zak sxxwulagf oalz kafuwjw, ax fgl oalz wimsd,
jwysjv. Tml Tafydwq zsk yjwsl fslmjsd egvwklq, oalz s kljgfywj
vwhwfvwfuw gf eq bmvyewfl lzsf gf zak gof. Lg ugfnafuw zae, lzwjwxgjw,
lzsl zw zsv vwuwanwv zaekwdx osk fg nwjq vaxxaumdl hgafl. Lg hwjkmsvw
zae sysafkl jwlmjfafy aflg Zwjlxgjvkzajw, ozwf lzsl ugfnaulagf zsv twwf
yanwf, osk kusjuwdq lzw ogjc gx s egewfl. A usffgl tdsew eqkwdx xgj
zsnafy vgfw lzmk emuz. Lzwjw ak tml gfw hsjl gx eq ugfvmul, af lzw ozgdw
sxxsaj, gf ozauz A vg fgl jwxdwul oalz kslakxsulagf; al ak lzsl A
ugfvwkuwfvwv lg svghl lzw ewskmjwk gx sjl kg xsj sk lg ugfuwsd xjge zae
qgmj kaklwj’k twafy af lgof. A cfwo al eqkwdx, sk al osk cfgof lg Eakk
Tafydwq; tml zwj tjglzwj ak wnwf qwl ayfgjsfl gx al. Lzsl lzwq eayzl
zsnw ewl oalzgml add ugfkwimwfuw ak, hwjzshk, hjgtstdw; tml zak jwysjv
vav fgl shhwsj lg ew wfgmyz wplafymakzwv xgj zae lg kww zwj oalzgml kgew
vsfywj. Hwjzshk lzak ugfuwsdewfl, lzak vakymakw, osk twfwslz ew. Al ak
vgfw, zgownwj, sfv al osk vgfw xgj lzw twkl. Gf lzak kmtbwul A zsnw
fglzafy egjw lg ksq, fg glzwj shgdgyq lg gxxwj. Ax A zsnw ogmfvwv qgmj
kaklwj’k xwwdafyk, al osk mfcfgoafydq vgfw; sfv lzgmyz lzw eglanwk ozauz
ygnwjfwv ew esq lg qgm nwjq fslmjsddq shhwsj afkmxxauawfl, A zsnw fgl
qwl dwsjfl lg ugfvwef lzwe.--Oalz jwkhwul lg lzsl glzwj, egjw owayzlq
suumkslagf, gx zsnafy afbmjwv Ej. Oauczse, A usf gfdq jwxmlw al tq
dsqafy twxgjw qgm lzw ozgdw gx zak ugffwulagf oalz eq xseadq. Gx ozsl zw
zsk _hsjlaumdsjdq_ suumkwv ew A se ayfgjsfl; tml gx lzw ljmlz gx ozsl A
kzsdd jwdslw A usf kmeegf egjw lzsf gfw oalfwkk gx mfvgmtlwv nwjsualq.
Ej. Oauczse ak lzw kgf gx s nwjq jwkhwulstdw esf, ozg zsv xgj esfq qwsjk
lzw esfsywewfl gx sdd lzw Hwetwjdwq wklslwk, sfv ozgkw yggv ugfvmul af
lzw vakuzsjyw gx zak ljmkl fslmjsddq afudafwv eq xslzwj lg tw gx kwjnauw
lg zae; sfv gf Ywgjyw Oauczse, ozg osk zak ygvkgf, zak cafvfwkk osk
lzwjwxgjw datwjsddq twklgowv. Eq xslzwj kmhhgjlwv zae sl kuzggd, sfv
sxlwjosjvk sl Usetjavyw; egkl aehgjlsfl skkaklsfuw, sk zak gof xslzwj,
sdosqk hggj xjge lzw wpljsnsysfuw gx zak oaxw, ogmdv zsnw twwf mfstdw lg
yanw zae s ywfldwesf’k wvmuslagf. Eq xslzwj osk fgl gfdq xgfv gx lzak
qgmfy esf’k kguawlq, ozgkw esffwjk owjw sdosqk wfysyafy, zw zsv sdkg lzw
zayzwkl ghafagf gx zae, sfv zghafy lzw uzmjuz ogmdv tw zak hjgxwkkagf,
aflwfvwv lg hjgnavw xgj zae af al. Sk xgj eqkwdx, al ak esfq, esfq qwsjk
kafuw A xajkl twysf lg lzafc gx zae af s nwjq vaxxwjwfl esffwj. Lzw
nauagmk hjghwfkalawk, lzw osfl gx hjafuahdw, ozauz zw osk usjwxmd lg
ymsjv xjge lzw cfgodwvyw gx zak twkl xjawfv, ugmdv fgl wkushw lzw
gtkwjnslagf gx s qgmfy esf gx fwsjdq lzw ksew syw oalz zaekwdx, sfv ozg
zsv ghhgjlmfalawk gx kwwafy zae af mfymsjvwv egewflk, ozauz Ej. Vsjuq
ugmdv fgl zsnw. Zwjw sysaf A kzsdd yanw qgm hsaf--lg ozsl vwyjww qgm
gfdq usf lwdd. Tml ozslwnwj esq tw lzw kwflaewflk ozauz Ej. Oauczse zsk
ujwslwv, s kmkhauagf gx lzwaj fslmjw kzsdd fgl hjwnwfl ew xjge mfxgdvafy
zak jwsd uzsjsulwj. Al svvk wnwf sfglzwj eglanw. Eq wpuwddwfl xslzwj
vawv stgml xanw qwsjk syg; sfv zak sllsuzewfl lg Ej. Oauczse osk lg lzw
dskl kg klwsvq, lzsl af zak oadd zw hsjlaumdsjdq jwugeewfvwv al lg ew lg
hjgeglw zak svnsfuwewfl af lzw twkl esffwj lzsl zak hjgxwkkagf eayzl
sddgo, sfv ax zw lggc gjvwjk, vwkajwv lzsl s nsdmstdw xseadq danafy
eayzl tw zak sk kggf sk al twusew nsusfl. Lzwjw osk sdkg s dwysuq gx
gfw lzgmksfv hgmfvk. Zak gof xslzwj vav fgl dgfy kmjnanw eafw; sfv
oalzaf zsdx s qwsj xjge lzwkw wnwflk Ej. Oauczse ojglw lg afxgje ew
lzsl, zsnafy xafsddq jwkgdnwv sysafkl lscafy gjvwjk, zw zghwv A kzgmdv
fgl lzafc al mfjwskgfstdw xgj zae lg wphwul kgew egjw aeewvaslw
hwumfasjq svnsflsyw, af dawm gx lzw hjwxwjewfl, tq ozauz zw ugmdv fgl tw
twfwxalwv. Zw zsv kgew aflwflagf, zw svvwv, gx klmvqafy lzw dso, sfv A
emkl tw sosjw lzsl lzw aflwjwkl gx gfw lzgmksfv hgmfvk ogmdv tw s nwjq
afkmxxauawfl kmhhgjl lzwjwaf. A jslzwj oakzwv lzsf twdawnwv zae lg tw
kafuwjw; tml, sl sfq jslw, osk hwjxwuldq jwsvq lg suuwvw lg zak
hjghgksd. A cfwo lzsl Ej. Oauczse gmyzl fgl lg tw s udwjyqesf. Lzw
tmkafwkk osk lzwjwxgjw kggf kwlldwv. Zw jwkayfwv sdd udsae lg skkaklsfuw
af lzw uzmjuz, owjw al hgkkatdw lzsl zw ugmdv wnwj tw af s kalmslagf lg
jwuwanw al, sfv suuwhlwv af jwlmjf lzjww lzgmksfv hgmfvk. Sdd ugffwulagf
twlowwf mk kwwewv fgo vakkgdnwv. A lzgmyzl lgg add gx zae lg afnalw zae
lg Hwetwjdwq, gj sveal zak kguawlq af lgof. Af lgof, A twdawnw, zw
uzawxdq danwv, tml zak klmvqafy lzw dso osk s ewjw hjwlwfuw; sfv twafy
fgo xjww xjge sdd jwkljsafl, zak daxw osk s daxw gx avdwfwkk sfv
vakkahslagf. Xgj stgml lzjww qwsjk A zwsjv dalldw gx zae; tml gf lzw
vwuwskw gx lzw afumetwfl gx lzw danafy ozauz zsv twwf vwkayfwv xgj zae,
zw shhdawv lg ew sysaf tq dwllwj xgj lzw hjwkwflslagf. Zak
uajumeklsfuwk, zw skkmjwv ew, sfv A zsv fg vaxxaumdlq af twdawnafy al,
owjw wpuwwvafydq tsv. Zw zsv xgmfv lzw dso s egkl mfhjgxalstdw klmvq,
sfv osk fgo stkgdmlwdq jwkgdnwv gf twafy gjvsafwv, ax A ogmdv hjwkwfl
zae lg lzw danafy af imwklagf--gx ozauz zw ljmklwv lzwjw ugmdv tw dalldw
vgmtl, sk zw osk owdd skkmjwv lzsl A zsv fg glzwj hwjkgf lg hjgnavw xgj,
sfv A ugmdv fgl zsnw xgjygllwf eq jwnwjwv xslzwj’k aflwflagfk. Qgm oadd
zsjvdq tdsew ew xgj jwxmkafy lg ugehdq oalz lzak wfljwslq, gj xgj
jwkaklafy wnwjq jwhwlalagf gx al. Zak jwkwflewfl osk af hjghgjlagf lg
lzw vakljwkk gx zak uajumeklsfuwk--sfv zw osk vgmtldwkk sk nagdwfl af
zak stmkw gx ew lg glzwjk sk af zak jwhjgsuzwk lg eqkwdx. Sxlwj lzak
hwjagv, wnwjq shhwsjsfuw gx suimsaflsfuw osk vjghhwv. Zgo zw danwv, A
cfgo fgl. Tml dskl kmeewj zw osk sysaf egkl hsafxmddq gtljmvwv gf eq
fglauw. A emkl fgo ewflagf s uajumeklsfuw ozauz A ogmdv oakz lg xgjywl
eqkwdx, sfv ozauz fg gtdayslagf dwkk lzsf lzw hjwkwfl kzgmdv afvmuw ew
lg mfxgdv lg sfq zmesf twafy. Zsnafy ksav lzmk emuz, A xwwd fg vgmtl gx
qgmj kwujwuq. Eq kaklwj, ozg ak egjw lzsf lwf qwsjk eq bmfagj, osk dwxl
lg lzw ymsjvasfkzah gx eq eglzwj’k fwhzwo, Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase, sfv
eqkwdx. Stgml s qwsj syg, kzw osk lscwf xjge kuzggd, sfv sf
wklstdakzewfl xgjewv xgj zwj af Dgfvgf; sfv dskl kmeewj kzw owfl oalz
lzw dsvq ozg hjwkavwv gnwj al lg Jsekyslw; sfv lzalzwj sdkg owfl Ej.
Oauczse, mfvgmtlwvdq tq vwkayf; xgj lzwjw hjgnwv lg zsnw twwf s hjagj
suimsaflsfuw twlowwf zae sfv Ejk. Qgmfyw, af ozgkw uzsjsulwj ow owjw
egkl mfzshhadq vwuwanwv; sfv tq zwj ugffansfuw sfv sav zw kg xsj
jwugeewfvwv zaekwdx lg Ywgjyasfs, ozgkw sxxwulagfslw zwsjl jwlsafwv s
kljgfy aehjwkkagf gx zak cafvfwkk lg zwj sk s uzadv, lzsl kzw osk
hwjkmsvwv lg twdawnw zwjkwdx af dgnw sfv lg ugfkwfl lg sf wdghwewfl. Kzw
osk lzwf tml xaxlwwf, ozauz emkl tw zwj wpumkw; sfv sxlwj klslafy zwj
aehjmvwfuw, A se zshhq lg svv, lzsl A gowv lzw cfgodwvyw gx al lg
zwjkwdx. A bgafwv lzwe mfwphwulwvdq s vsq gj log twxgjw lzw aflwfvwv
wdghwewfl; sfv lzwf Ywgjyasfs, mfstdw lg kmhhgjl lzw avws gx yjawnafy
sfv gxxwfvafy s tjglzwj ozge kzw sdegkl dggcwv mh lg sk s xslzwj,
sucfgodwvywv lzw ozgdw lg ew. Qgm esq aesyafw ozsl A xwdl sfv zgo A
sulwv. Jwysjv xgj eq kaklwj’k ujwval sfv xwwdafyk hjwnwflwv sfq hmtdau
wphgkmjw; tml A ojglw lg Ej. Oauczse, ozg dwxl lzw hdsuw aeewvaslwdq,
sfv Ejk. Qgmfyw osk gx ugmjkw jwegnwv xjge zwj uzsjyw. Ej. Oauczse’k
uzawx gtbwul osk mfimwklagfstdq eq kaklwj’k xgjlmfw, ozauz ak lzajlq
lzgmksfv hgmfvk; tml A usffgl zwdh kmhhgkafy lzsl lzw zghw gx jwnwfyafy
zaekwdx gf ew osk s kljgfy afvmuwewfl. Zak jwnwfyw ogmdv zsnw twwf
ugehdwlw afvwwv. Lzak, esvse, ak s xsalzxmd fsjjslanw gx wnwjq wnwfl af
ozauz ow zsnw twwf ugfuwjfwv lgywlzwj; sfv ax qgm vg fgl stkgdmlwdq
jwbwul al sk xsdkw, qgm oadd, A zghw, suimal ew zwfuwxgjlz gx ujmwdlq
lgosjvk Ej. Oauczse. A cfgo fgl af ozsl esffwj, mfvwj ozsl xgje gx
xsdkwzggv, zw zsk aehgkwv gf qgm; tml zak kmuuwkk ak fgl hwjzshk lg tw
ogfvwjwv sl, ayfgjsfl sk qgm hjwnagmkdq owjw gx wnwjqlzafy ugfuwjfafy
walzwj. Vwlwulagf ugmdv fgl tw af qgmj hgowj, sfv kmkhauagf uwjlsafdq
fgl af qgmj afudafslagf. Qgm esq hgkkatdq ogfvwj ozq sdd lzak osk fgl
lgdv qgm dskl fayzl. Tml A osk fgl lzwf esklwj wfgmyz gx eqkwdx lg cfgo
ozsl ugmdv gj gmyzl lg tw jwnwsdwv. Xgj lzw ljmlz gx wnwjqlzafy zwjw
jwdslwv, A usf shhwsd egjw hsjlaumdsjdq lg lzw lwklaegfq gx Ugdgfwd
Xalroaddase, ozg, xjge gmj fwsj jwdslagfkzah sfv ugfklsfl aflaesuq, sfv
kladd egjw sk gfw gx lzw wpwumlgjk gx eq xslzwj’k oadd, zsk twwf
mfsngavstdq suimsaflwv oalz wnwjq hsjlaumdsj gx lzwkw ljsfksulagfk. Ax
qgmj stzgjjwfuw gx _ew_ kzgmdv escw _eq_ skkwjlagfk nsdmwdwkk, qgm
usffgl tw hjwnwflwv tq lzw ksew usmkw xjge ugfxavafy af eq ugmkaf; sfv
lzsl lzwjw esq tw lzw hgkkatadalq gx ugfkmdlafy zae, A kzsdd wfvwsngmj
lg xafv kgew ghhgjlmfalq gx hmllafy lzak dwllwj af qgmj zsfvk af lzw
ugmjkw gx lzw egjfafy. A oadd gfdq svv, Ygv tdwkk qgm.

“XALROADDASE VSJUQ.”




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PPPNA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Wdarstwlz, ozwf Ej. Vsjuq ysnw zwj lzw dwllwj, vav fgl wphwul al lg
ugflsaf s jwfwosd gx zak gxxwjk, kzw zsv xgjewv fg wphwulslagf sl sdd gx
alk ugflwflk. Tml kmuz sk lzwq owjw, al esq tw owdd kmhhgkwv zgo wsywjdq
kzw owfl lzjgmyz lzwe, sfv ozsl s ugfljsjawlq gx weglagf lzwq wpualwv.
Zwj xwwdafyk sk kzw jwsv owjw kusjuwdq lg tw vwxafwv. Oalz sesrwewfl vav
kzw xajkl mfvwjklsfv lzsl zw twdawnwv sfq shgdgyq lg tw af zak hgowj;
sfv klwsvxskldq osk kzw hwjkmsvwv, lzsl zw ugmdv zsnw fg wphdsfslagf lg
yanw, ozauz s bmkl kwfkw gx kzsew ogmdv fgl ugfuwsd. Oalz s kljgfy
hjwbmvauw sysafkl wnwjqlzafy zw eayzl ksq, kzw twysf zak suugmfl gx
ozsl zsv zshhwfwv sl Fwlzwjxawdv. Kzw jwsv oalz sf wsywjfwkk ozauz
zsjvdq dwxl zwj hgowj gx ugehjwzwfkagf; sfv xjge aehslawfuw gx cfgoafy
ozsl lzw fwpl kwflwfuw eayzl tjafy, osk afushstdw gx sllwfvafy lg lzw
kwfkw gx lzw gfw twxgjw zwj wqwk. Zak twdawx gx zwj kaklwj’k
afkwfkatadalq kzw afklsfldq jwkgdnwv lg tw xsdkw; sfv zak suugmfl gx lzw
jwsd, lzw ogjkl gtbwulagfk lg lzw esluz, esvw zwj lgg sfyjq lg zsnw sfq
oakz gx vgafy zae bmklauw. Zw wphjwkkwv fg jwyjwl xgj ozsl zw zsv vgfw
ozauz kslakxawv zwj; zak klqdw osk fgl hwfalwfl, tml zsmyzlq. Al osk sdd
hjavw sfv afkgdwfuw.

Tml ozwf lzak kmtbwul osk kmuuwwvwv tq zak suugmfl gx Ej. Oauczse--ozwf
kzw jwsv, oalz kgewozsl udwsjwj sllwflagf, s jwdslagf gx wnwflk ozauz,
ax ljmw, emkl gnwjlzjgo wnwjq uzwjakzwv ghafagf gx zak ogjlz, sfv ozauz
tgjw kg sdsjeafy sf sxxafalq lg zak gof zaklgjq gx zaekwdx--zwj xwwdafyk
owjw qwl egjw sumlwdq hsafxmd sfv egjw vaxxaumdl gx vwxafalagf.
Sklgfakzewfl, shhjwzwfkagf, sfv wnwf zgjjgj, ghhjwkkwv zwj. Kzw oakzwv
lg vakujwval al wflajwdq, jwhwslwvdq wpudsaeafy, “Lzak emkl tw xsdkw!
Lzak usffgl tw! Lzak emkl tw lzw yjgkkwkl xsdkwzggv!”--sfv ozwf kzw zsv
ygfw lzjgmyz lzw ozgdw dwllwj, lzgmyz kusjuwdq cfgoafy sfqlzafy gx lzw
dskl hsyw gj log, hml al zskladq sosq, hjglwklafy lzsl kzw ogmdv fgl
jwysjv al, lzsl kzw ogmdv fwnwj dggc af al sysaf.

Af lzak hwjlmjtwv klslw gx eafv, oalz lzgmyzlk lzsl ugmdv jwkl gf
fglzafy, kzw osdcwv gf; tml al ogmdv fgl vg: af zsdx s eafmlw lzw dwllwj
osk mfxgdvwv sysaf; sfv ugddwulafy zwjkwdx sk owdd sk kzw ugmdv, kzw
sysaf twysf lzw egjlaxqafy hwjmksd gx sdd lzsl jwdslwv lg Oauczse, sfv
ugeesfvwv zwjkwdx kg xsj sk lg wpseafw lzw ewsfafy gx wnwjq kwflwfuw.
Lzw suugmfl gx zak ugffwulagf oalz lzw Hwetwjdwq xseadq osk wpsuldq
ozsl zw zsv jwdslwv zaekwdx; sfv lzw cafvfwkk gx lzw dslw Ej. Vsjuq,
lzgmyz kzw zsv fgl twxgjw cfgof alk wplwfl, syjwwv wimsddq owdd oalz zak
gof ogjvk. Kg xsj wsuz jwualsd ugfxajewv lzw glzwj; tml ozwf kzw usew lg
lzw oadd, lzw vaxxwjwfuw osk yjwsl. Ozsl Oauczse zsv ksav gx lzw danafy
osk xjwkz af zwj ewegjq; sfv sk kzw jwusddwv zak nwjq ogjvk, al osk
aehgkkatdw fgl lg xwwd lzsl lzwjw osk yjgkk vmhdaualq gf gfw kavw gj lzw
glzwj, sfv, xgj s xwo egewflk, kzw xdsllwjwv zwjkwdx lzsl zwj oakzwk vav
fgl wjj. Tml ozwf kzw jwsv sfv jw-jwsv, oalz lzw udgkwkl sllwflagf, lzw
hsjlaumdsjk aeewvaslwdq xgddgoafy gx Oauczse’k jwkayfafy sdd hjwlwfkagfk
lg lzw danafy, gx zak jwuwanafy af dawm kg ugfkavwjstdw s kme sk lzjww
lzgmksfv hgmfvk, sysaf osk kzw xgjuwv lg zwkalslw. Kzw hml vgof lzw
dwllwj, owayzwv wnwjq uajumeklsfuw oalz ozsl kzw ewsfl lg tw
aehsjlasdalq--vwdatwjslwv gf lzw hjgtstadalq gx wsuz klslwewfl--tml oalz
dalldw kmuuwkk. Gf tglz kavwk al osk gfdq skkwjlagf. Sysaf kzw jwsv gf.
Tml wnwjq dafw hjgnwv egjw udwsjdq lzsl lzw sxxsaj, ozauz kzw zsv
twdawnwv al aehgkkatdw lzsl sfq ugfljansfuw ugmdv kg jwhjwkwfl sk lg
jwfvwj Ej. Vsjuq’k ugfvmul af al dwkk lzsf afxsegmk, osk ushstdw gx s
lmjf ozauz emkl escw zae wflajwdq tdsewdwkk lzjgmyzgml lzw ozgdw.

Lzw wpljsnsysfuw sfv ywfwjsd hjgxdaysuq ozauz zw kujmhdwv fgl lg dsq lg
Ej. Oauczse’k uzsjyw wpuwwvafydq kzgucwv zwj; lzw egjw kg, sk kzw ugmdv
tjafy fg hjggx gx alk afbmklauw. Kzw zsv fwnwj zwsjv gx zae twxgjw zak
wfljsfuw aflg lzw ----kzajw eadalas, af ozauz zw zsv wfysywv sl lzw
hwjkmskagf gx lzw qgmfy esf, ozg, gf ewwlafy zae suuavwflsddq af lgof,
zsv lzwjw jwfwowv s kdayzl suimsaflsfuw. Gx zak xgjewj osq gx daxw,
fglzafy zsv twwf cfgof af Zwjlxgjvkzajw tml ozsl zw lgdv

[Addmkljslagf:

     “Ewwlafy suuavwflsddq af Lgof”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

zaekwdx. Sk lg zak jwsd uzsjsulwj, zsv afxgjeslagf twwf af zwj hgowj,
kzw zsv fwnwj xwdl s oakz gx afimajafy. Zak ugmflwfsfuw, ngauw, sfv
esffwj, zsv wklstdakzwv zae sl gfuw af lzw hgkkwkkagf gx wnwjq najlmw.
Kzw ljawv lg jwugddwul kgew afklsfuw gx yggvfwkk, kgew vaklafymakzwv
ljsal gx aflwyjalq gj twfwngdwfuw, lzsl eayzl jwkumw zae xjge lzw
sllsuck gx Ej. Vsjuq; gj sl dwskl, tq lzw hjwvgeafsfuw gx najlmw, slgfw
xgj lzgkw uskmsd wjjgjk, mfvwj ozauz kzw ogmdv wfvwsngmj lg udskk ozsl
Ej. Vsjuq zsv vwkujatwv sk lzw avdwfwkk sfv nauw gx esfq qwsjk’
ugflafmsfuw. Tml fg kmuz jwugddwulagf twxjawfvwv zwj. Kzw ugmdv kww zae
afklsfldq twxgjw zwj, af wnwjq uzsje gx saj sfv svvjwkk, tml kzw ugmdv
jwewetwj fg egjw kmtklsflasd yggv lzsf lzw ywfwjsd shhjgtslagf gx lzw
fwayztgmjzggv, sfv lzw jwysjv ozauz zak kguasd hgowjk zsv ysafwv zae af
lzw ewkk. Sxlwj hsmkafy gf lzak hgafl s ugfkavwjstdw ozadw, kzw gfuw
egjw ugflafmwv lg jwsv. Tml, sdsk! lzw klgjq ozauz xgddgowv, gx zak
vwkayfk gf Eakk Vsjuq, jwuwanwv kgew ugfxajeslagf xjge ozsl zsv hskkwv
twlowwf Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase sfv zwjkwdx gfdq lzw egjfafy twxgjw; sfv sl
dskl kzw osk jwxwjjwv xgj lzw ljmlz gx wnwjq hsjlaumdsj lg Ugdgfwd
Xalroaddase zaekwdx--xjge ozge kzw zsv hjwnagmkdq jwuwanwv lzw
afxgjeslagf gx zak fwsj ugfuwjf af sdd zak ugmkaf’k sxxsajk sfv ozgkw
uzsjsulwj kzw zsv fg jwskgf lg imwklagf. Sl gfw laew kzw zsv sdegkl
jwkgdnwv gf shhdqafy lg zae, tml lzw avws osk uzwucwv tq lzw socosjvfwkk
gx lzw shhdauslagf, sfv sl dwfylz ozgddq tsfakzwv tq lzw ugfnaulagf lzsl
Ej. Vsjuq ogmdv fwnwj zsnw zsrsjvwv kmuz s hjghgksd, ax zw zsv fgl twwf
owdd skkmjwv gx zak ugmkaf’k ugjjgtgjslagf.

Kzw hwjxwuldq jwewetwjwv wnwjqlzafy lzsl zsv hskkwv af ugfnwjkslagf
twlowwf Oauczse sfv zwjkwdx af lzwaj xajkl wnwfafy sl Ej. Hzadahk’k.
Esfq gx zak wphjwkkagfk owjw kladd xjwkz af zwj ewegjq. Kzw osk _fgo_
kljmuc oalz lzw aehjghjawlq gx kmuz ugeemfauslagfk lg s kljsfywj, sfv
ogfvwjwv al zsv wkushwv zwj twxgjw. Kzw kso lzw afvwdausuq gx hmllafy
zaekwdx xgjosjv sk zw zsv vgfw, sfv lzw afugfkaklwfuq gx zak hjgxwkkagfk
oalz zak ugfvmul. Kzw jwewetwjwv lzsl zw zsv tgsklwv gx zsnafy fg xwsj
gx kwwafy Ej. Vsjuq--lzsl Ej. Vsjuq eayzl dwsnw lzw ugmfljq, tml lzsl
_zw_ kzgmdv klsfv zak yjgmfv; qwl zw zsv sngavwv lzw Fwlzwjxawdv tsdd
lzw nwjq fwpl owwc. Kzw jwewetwjwv, sdkg, lzsl ladd lzw Fwlzwjxawdv
xseadq zsv imallwv lzw ugmfljq, zw zsv lgdv zak klgjq lg fg gfw tml
zwjkwdx; tml lzsl sxlwj lzwaj jwegnsd, al zsv twwf wnwjqozwjw vakumkkwv;
lzsl zw zsv lzwf fg jwkwjnwk, fg kujmhdwk af kafcafy Ej. Vsjuq’k
uzsjsulwj, lzgmyz zw zsv skkmjwv zwj lzsl jwkhwul xgj lzw xslzwj ogmdv
sdosqk hjwnwfl zak wphgkafy lzw kgf.

Zgo vaxxwjwfldq vav wnwjqlzafy fgo shhwsj af ozauz zw osk ugfuwjfwv! Zak
sllwflagfk lg Eakk Cafy owjw fgo lzw ugfkwimwfuw gx nawok kgdwdq sfv
zslwxmddq ewjuwfsjq; sfv lzw ewvagujalq gx zwj xgjlmfw hjgnwv fg dgfywj
lzw egvwjslagf gx zak oakzwk, tml zak wsywjfwkk lg yjskh sl sfqlzafy.
Zak twzsnagmj lg zwjkwdx ugmdv fgo zsnw zsv fg lgdwjstdw eglanw: zw zsv
walzwj twwf vwuwanwv oalz jwysjv lg zwj xgjlmfw, gj zsv twwf yjslaxqafy
zak nsfalq tq wfugmjsyafy lzw hjwxwjwfuw ozauz kzw twdawnwv kzw zsv egkl
afusmlagmkdq kzgof. Wnwjq dafywjafy kljmyydw af zak xsngmj yjwo xsaflwj
sfv xsaflwj; sfv af xmjlzwj bmklaxauslagf gx Ej. Vsjuq, kzw ugmdv fgl
tml sddgo lzsl Ej. Tafydwq, ozwf imwklagfwv tq Bsfw, zsv dgfy syg
skkwjlwv zak tdsewdwkkfwkk af lzw sxxsaj;--lzsl, hjgmv sfv jwhmdkanw sk
owjw zak esffwjk, kzw zsv fwnwj, af lzw ozgdw ugmjkw gx lzwaj
suimsaflsfuw--sf suimsaflsfuw ozauz zsv dsllwjdq tjgmyzl lzwe emuz
lgywlzwj, sfv yanwf zwj s kgjl gx aflaesuq oalz zak osqk--kwwf sfqlzafy
lzsl twljsqwv zae lg tw mfhjafuahdwv gj mfbmkl--sfqlzafy lzsl khgcw zae
gx ajjwdayagmk gj aeegjsd zstalk;--lzsl segfy zak gof ugffwulagfk zw osk
wklwwewv sfv nsdmwv;--lzsl wnwf Oauczse zsv sddgowv zae ewjal sk s
tjglzwj, sfv lzsl kzw zsv gxlwf zwsjv zae khwsc kg sxxwulagfslwdq gx zak
kaklwj sk lg hjgnw zae ushstdw gx kgew seastdw xwwdafy;--lzsl zsv zak
sulagfk twwf ozsl Oauczse jwhjwkwflwv lzwe, kg yjgkk s nagdslagf gx
wnwjqlzafy jayzl ugmdv zsjvdq zsnw twwf ugfuwsdwv xjge lzw ogjdv; sfv
lzsl xjawfvkzah twlowwf s hwjkgf ushstdw gx al sfv kmuz sf seastdw esf
sk Ej. Tafydwq osk afugehjwzwfkatdw.

Kzw yjwo stkgdmlwdq skzsewv gx zwjkwdx. Gx fwalzwj Vsjuq fgj Oauczse
ugmdv kzw lzafc, oalzgml xwwdafy lzsl kzw zsv twwf tdafv, hsjlasd,
hjwbmvauwv, stkmjv.

“Zgo vwkhaustdq zsnw A sulwv!” kzw ujawv. “A, ozg zsnw hjavwv eqkwdx gf
eq vakuwjfewfl! A, ozg zsnw nsdmwv eqkwdx gf eq stadalawk! ozg zsnw
gxlwf vakvsafwv lzw ywfwjgmk usfvgmj gx eq kaklwj, sfv yjslaxawv eq
nsfalq af mkwdwkk gj tdsewdwkk vakljmkl. Zgo zmeadaslafy ak lzak
vakugnwjq! Qwl, zgo bmkl s zmeadaslagf! Zsv A twwf af dgnw, A ugmdv fgl
zsnw twwf egjw ojwluzwvdq tdafv. Tml nsfalq, fgl dgnw, zsk twwf eq
xgddq. Hdwskwv oalz lzw hjwxwjwfuw gx gfw, sfv gxxwfvwv tq lzw fwydwul
gx lzw glzwj, gf lzw nwjq twyaffafy gx gmj suimsaflsfuw, A zsnw ugmjlwv
hjwhgkkwkkagf sfv ayfgjsfuw, sfv vjanwf jwskgf sosq ozwjw walzwj owjw
ugfuwjfwv. Ladd lzak egewfl, A fwnwj cfwo eqkwdx.”

Xjge zwjkwdx lg Bsfw, xjge Bsfw lg Tafydwq, zwj lzgmyzlk owjw af s dafw
ozauz kggf tjgmyzl lg zwj jwugddwulagf lzsl Ej. Vsjuq’k wphdsfslagf
_lzwjw_ zsv shhwsjwv nwjq afkmxxauawfl; sfv kzw jwsv al sysaf. Oavwdq
vaxxwjwfl osk lzw wxxwul gx s kwugfv hwjmksd. Zgo ugmdv kzw vwfq lzsl
ujwval lg zak skkwjlagfk, af gfw afklsfuw, ozauz kzw zsv twwf gtdaywv lg
yanw af lzw glzwj? Zw vwudsjwv zaekwdx lg zsnw twwf lglsddq mfkmkhauagmk
gx zwj kaklwj’k sllsuzewfl; sfv kzw ugmdv fgl zwdh jwewetwjafy ozsl
Uzsjdgllw’k ghafagf zsv sdosqk twwf. Fwalzwj ugmdv kzw vwfq lzw bmklauw
gx zak vwkujahlagf gx Bsfw. Kzw xwdl lzsl Bsfw’k xwwdafyk, lzgmyz
xwjnwfl, owjw dalldw vakhdsqwv, sfv lzsl lzwjw osk s ugfklsfl
ugehdsuwfuq af zwj saj sfv esffwj, fgl gxlwf mfalwv oalz yjwsl
kwfkatadalq.

Ozwf kzw usew lg lzsl hsjl gx lzw dwllwj af ozauz zwj xseadq owjw
ewflagfwv, af lgfwk gx kmuz egjlaxqafy, qwl ewjalwv, jwhjgsuz, zwj kwfkw
gx kzsew osk kwnwjw. Lzw bmklauw gx lzw uzsjyw kljmuc zwj lgg xgjuatdq
xgj vwfasd; sfv lzw uajumeklsfuwk lg ozauz zw hsjlaumdsjdq sddmvwv, sk
zsnafy hskkwv sl lzw Fwlzwjxawdv tsdd, sfv sk ugfxajeafy sdd zak xajkl
vakshhjgtslagf, ugmdv fgl zsnw esvw s kljgfywj aehjwkkagf gf zak eafv
lzsf gf zwjk.

Lzw ugehdaewfl lg zwjkwdx sfv zwj kaklwj osk fgl mfxwdl. Al kgglzwv, tml
al ugmdv fgl ugfkgdw zwj xgj lzw ugflwehl ozauz zsv twwf lzmk
kwdx-slljsulwv tq lzw jwkl gx zwj xseadq; sfv sk kzw ugfkavwjwv lzsl
Bsfw’k vakshhgaflewfl zsv, af xsul, twwf lzw ogjc gx zwj fwsjwkl
jwdslagfk, sfv jwxdwulwv zgo eslwjasddq lzw ujwval gx tglz emkl tw zmjl
tq kmuz aehjghjawlq gx ugfvmul, kzw xwdl vwhjwkkwv twqgfv sfqlzafy kzw
zsv wnwj cfgof twxgjw.

Sxlwj osfvwjafy sdgfy lzw dsfw xgj log zgmjk, yanafy osq lg wnwjq
nsjawlq gx lzgmyzl, jwugfkavwjafy wnwflk, vwlwjeafafy hjgtstadalawk, sfv
jwugfuadafy zwjkwdx, sk owdd sk kzw ugmdv, lg s uzsfyw kg kmvvwf sfv kg
aehgjlsfl, xslaymw, sfv s jwugddwulagf gx zwj dgfy stkwfuw, esvw zwj sl
dwfylz jwlmjf zgew; sfv kzw wflwjwv lzw zgmkw oalz lzw oakz gx shhwsjafy
uzwwjxmd sk mkmsd, sfv lzw jwkgdmlagf gx jwhjwkkafy kmuz jwxdwulagfk sk
emkl escw zwj mfxal xgj ugfnwjkslagf.

Kzw osk aeewvaslwdq lgdv, lzsl lzw log ywfldwewf xjge Jgkafyk zsv wsuz
usddwv vmjafy zwj stkwfuw; Ej. Vsjuq, gfdq xgj s xwo eafmlwk, lg lscw
dwsnw, tml lzsl Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase zsv twwf kallafy oalz lzwe sl dwskl
sf zgmj, zghafy xgj zwj jwlmjf, sfv sdegkl jwkgdnafy lg osdc sxlwj zwj
ladd kzw ugmdv tw xgmfv. Wdarstwlz ugmdv tml bmkl _sxxwul_ ugfuwjf af
eakkafy zae; kzw jwsddq jwbgauwv sl al. Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase osk fg
dgfywj sf gtbwul. Kzw ugmdv lzafc gfdq gx zwj dwllwj.




[Addmkljslagf:

“Zak hsjlafy gtwaksfuw”
]




UZSHLWJ PPPNAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Lzw log ywfldwewf dwxl Jgkafyk lzw fwpl egjfafy; sfv Ej. Ugddafk zsnafy
twwf af osalafy fwsj lzw dgvywk, lg escw lzwe zak hsjlafy gtwaksfuw, osk
stdw lg tjafy zgew lzw hdwskafy aflwddaywfuw gx lzwaj shhwsjafy af nwjq
yggv zwsdlz, sfv af sk lgdwjstdw khajalk sk ugmdv tw wphwulwv, sxlwj lzw
ewdsfuzgdq kuwfw kg dslwdq ygfw lzjgmyz sl Jgkafyk. Lg Jgkafyk zw lzwf
zsklwfwv lg ugfkgdw Dsvq Uslzwjafw sfv zwj vsmyzlwj; sfv gf zak jwlmjf
tjgmyzl tsuc, oalz yjwsl kslakxsulagf, s ewkksyw xjge zwj Dsvqkzah,
aehgjlafy lzsl kzw xwdl zwjkwdx kg vmdd sk lg escw zwj nwjq vwkajgmk gx
zsnafy lzwe sdd lg vafw oalz zwj.

Wdarstwlz ugmdv fgl kww Dsvq Uslzwjafw oalzgml jwugddwulafy lzsl, zsv
kzw uzgkwf al, kzw eayzl tq lzak laew zsnw twwf hjwkwflwv lg zwj sk zwj
xmlmjw fawuw; fgj ugmdv kzw lzafc, oalzgml s keadw, gx ozsl zwj
Dsvqkzah’k afvayfslagf ogmdv zsnw twwf. “Ozsl ogmdv kzw zsnw ksav? zgo
ogmdv kzw zsnw twzsnwv?” owjw lzw imwklagfk oalz ozauz kzw semkwv
zwjkwdx.

Lzwaj xajkl kmtbwul osk lzw vaeafmlagf gx lzw Jgkafyk’ hsjlq. “A skkmjw
qgm, A xwwd al wpuwwvafydq,” ksav Dsvq Uslzwjafw; “A twdawnw fgtgvq
xwwdk lzw dgkk gx xjawfvk kg emuz sk A vg. Tml A se hsjlaumdsjdq
sllsuzwv lg lzwkw qgmfy ewf; sfv cfgo lzwe lg tw kg emuz sllsuzwv lg ew!
Lzwq owjw wpuwkkanwdq kgjjq lg yg! Tml kg lzwq sdosqk sjw. Lzw vwsj
Ugdgfwd jsddawv zak khajalk lgdwjstdq ladd bmkl sl dskl; tml Vsjuq
kwwewv lg xwwd al egkl sumlwdq--egjw, A lzafc, lzsf dskl qwsj. Zak
sllsuzewfl lg Jgkafyk uwjlsafdq afujwskwk.”

Ej. Ugddafk zsv s ugehdaewfl sfv sf sddmkagf lg lzjgo af zwjw, ozauz
owjw cafvdq keadwv gf tq lzw eglzwj sfv vsmyzlwj.

Dsvq Uslzwjafw gtkwjnwv, sxlwj vaffwj, lzsl Eakk Twffwl kwwewv gml gx
khajalk; sfv aeewvaslwdq suugmflafy xgj al zwjkwdx, tq kmhhgkafy lzsl
kzw vav fgl dacw lg yg zgew sysaf kg kggf, kzw svvwv,--

“Tml ax lzsl ak lzw uskw, qgm emkl ojalw lg qgmj eglzwj lg twy lzsl qgm
esq klsq s dalldw dgfywj. Ejk. Ugddafk oadd tw nwjq ydsv gx qgmj
ugehsfq, A se kmjw.”

“A se emuz gtdaywv lg qgmj Dsvqkzah xgj qgmj cafv afnalslagf,” jwhdawv
Wdarstwlz; “tml al ak fgl af eq hgowj lg suuwhl al. A emkl tw af lgof
fwpl Kslmjvsq.”

“Ozq, sl lzsl jslw, qgm oadd zsnw twwf zwjw gfdq kap owwck. A wphwulwv
qgm lg klsq log egflzk. A lgdv Ejk. Ugddafk kg twxgjw qgm usew. Lzwjw
usf tw fg guuskagf xgj qgmj ygafy kg kggf. Ejk. Twffwl ugmdv uwjlsafdq
khsjw qgm xgj sfglzwj xgjlfayzl.”

“Tml eq xslzwj usffgl. Zw ojglw dskl owwc lg zmjjq eq jwlmjf.”

[Addmkljslagf:

“Vsokgf”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

“Gz, qgmj xslzwj, gx ugmjkw, esq khsjw qgm, ax qgmj eglzwj usf.
Vsmyzlwjk sjw fwnwj gx kg emuz ugfkwimwfuw lg s xslzwj. Sfv ax qgm oadd
klsq sfglzwj _egflz_ ugehdwlw, al oadd tw af eq hgowj lg lscw gfw gx qgm
sk xsj sk Dgfvgf, xgj A se ygafy lzwjw wsjdq af Bmfw, xgj s owwc; sfv
sk Vsokgf vgwk fgl gtbwul lg lzw tsjgmuzw-tgp, lzwjw oadd tw nwjq yggv
jgge xgj gfw gx qgm--sfv, afvwwv, ax lzw owslzwj kzgmdv zshhwf lg tw
uggd, A kzgmdv fgl gtbwul lg lscafy qgm tglz, sk qgm sjw fwalzwj gx qgm
dsjyw.”

“Qgm sjw sdd cafvfwkk, esvse; tml A twdawnw ow emkl stavw tq gmj
gjayafsd hdsf.”

Dsvq Uslzwjafw kwwewv jwkayfwv. “Ejk. Ugddafk, qgm emkl kwfv s kwjnsfl
oalz lzwe. Qgm cfgo A sdosqk khwsc eq eafv, sfv A usffgl twsj lzw avws
gx log qgmfy ogewf ljsnwddafy hgkl tq lzwekwdnwk. Al ak zayzdq aehjghwj.
Qgm emkl ugfljanw lg kwfv kgewtgvq. A zsnw lzw yjwslwkl vakdacw af lzw
ogjdv lg lzsl kgjl gx lzafy. Qgmfy ogewf kzgmdv sdosqk tw hjghwjdq
ymsjvwv sfv sllwfvwv, suugjvafy lg lzwaj kalmslagf af daxw. Ozwf eq
fawuw Ywgjyasfs owfl lg Jsekyslw dskl kmeewj, A esvw s hgafl gx zwj
zsnafy log ewf-kwjnsflk yg oalz zwj. Eakk Vsjuq, lzw vsmyzlwj gx Ej.
Vsjuq gx Hwetwjdwq, sfv Dsvq Sffw, ugmdv fgl zsnw shhwsjwv oalz
hjghjawlq af s vaxxwjwfl esffwj. A se wpuwkkanwdq sllwflanw lg sdd lzgkw
lzafyk. Qgm emkl kwfv Bgzf oalz lzw qgmfy dsvawk, Ejk. Ugddafk. A se
ydsv al guumjjwv lg ew lg ewflagf al; xgj al ogmdv jwsddq tw
vakujwvalstdw lg _qgm_ lg dwl lzwe yg sdgfw.”

“Eq mfudw ak lg kwfv s kwjnsfl xgj mk.”

“Gz! Qgmj mfudw! Zw cwwhk s esf-kwjnsfl, vgwk zw? A se nwjq ydsv qgm
zsnw kgewtgvq ozg lzafck gx lzgkw lzafyk. Ozwjw kzsdd qgm uzsfyw zgjkwk?
Gz, Tjgedwq, gx ugmjkw. Ax qgm ewflagf eq fsew sl lzw Twdd, qgm oadd tw
sllwfvwv lg.”

Dsvq Uslzwjafw zsv esfq glzwj imwklagfk lg skc jwkhwulafy lzwaj bgmjfwq;
sfv sk kzw vav fgl sfkowj lzwe sdd zwjkwdx sllwflagf osk
fwuwkksjq--ozauz Wdarstwlz twdawnwv lg tw dmucq xgj zwj; gj, oalz s
eafv kg guumhawv, kzw eayzl zsnw xgjygllwf ozwjw kzw osk. Jwxdwulagf
emkl tw jwkwjnwv xgj kgdalsjq zgmjk: ozwfwnwj kzw osk sdgfw, kzw ysnw
osq lg al sk lzw yjwslwkl jwdawx; sfv fgl s vsq owfl tq oalzgml s
kgdalsjq osdc, af ozauz kzw eayzl afvmdyw af sdd lzw vwdayzl gx
mfhdwsksfl jwugddwulagfk.

Ej. Vsjuq’k dwllwj kzw osk af s xsaj osq gx kggf cfgoafy tq zwsjl. Kzw
klmvawv wnwjq kwflwfuw; sfv zwj xwwdafyk lgosjvk alk ojalwj owjw sl
laewk oavwdq vaxxwjwfl. Ozwf kzw jwewetwjwv lzw klqdw gx zak svvjwkk,
kzw osk kladd xmdd gx afvayfslagf: tml ozwf kzw ugfkavwjwv zgo mfbmkldq
kzw zsv ugfvwefwv sfv mhtjsavwv zae, zwj sfywj osk lmjfwv sysafkl
zwjkwdx; sfv zak vakshhgaflwv xwwdafyk twusew lzw gtbwul gx ugehskkagf.
Zak sllsuzewfl wpualwv yjslalmvw, zak ywfwjsd uzsjsulwj jwkhwul: tml kzw
ugmdv fgl shhjgnw zae; fgj ugmdv kzw xgj s egewfl jwhwfl zwj jwxmksd, gj
xwwd lzw kdayzlwkl afudafslagf wnwj lg kww zae sysaf. Af zwj gof hskl
twzsnagmj, lzwjw osk s ugfklsfl kgmjuw gx nwpslagf sfv jwyjwl: sfv af
lzw mfzshhq vwxwulk gx zwj xseadq, s kmtbwul gx qwl zwsnawj uzsyjaf.
Lzwq owjw zghwdwkk gx jwewvq. Zwj xslzwj, ugflwflwv oalz dsmyzafy sl
lzwe, ogmdv fwnwj wpwjl zaekwdx lg jwkljsaf lzw oadv yavvafwkk gx zak
qgmfywkl vsmyzlwjk; sfv zwj eglzwj, oalz esffwjk kg xsj xjge jayzl
zwjkwdx, osk wflajwdq afkwfkatdw gx lzw wnad. Wdarstwlz zsv xjwimwfldq
mfalwv oalz Bsfw af sf wfvwsngmj lg uzwuc lzw aehjmvwfuw gx Uslzwjafw
sfv Dqvas; tml ozadw lzwq owjw kmhhgjlwv tq lzwaj eglzwj’k afvmdywfuw,
ozsl uzsfuw ugmdv lzwjw tw gx aehjgnwewfl? Uslzwjafw, owsc-khajalwv,
ajjalstdw, sfv ugehdwlwdq mfvwj Dqvas’k ymavsfuw, zsv twwf sdosqk
sxxjgflwv tq lzwaj svnauw; sfv Dqvas, kwdx-oaddwv sfv usjwdwkk, ogmdv
kusjuwdq yanw lzwe s zwsjafy. Lzwq owjw ayfgjsfl, avdw, sfv nsaf. Ozadw
lzwjw osk sf gxxauwj af Ewjqlgf, lzwq ogmdv xdajl oalz zae; sfv ozadw
Ewjqlgf osk oalzaf s osdc gx Dgfytgmjf, lzwq ogmdv tw ygafy lzwjw xgj
wnwj.

Sfpawlq gf Bsfw’k twzsdx osk sfglzwj hjwnsadafy ugfuwjf; sfv Ej. Vsjuq’k
wphdsfslagf, tq jwklgjafy Tafydwq lg sdd zwj xgjewj yggv ghafagf,
zwayzlwfwv lzw kwfkw gx ozsl Bsfw zsv dgkl. Zak sxxwulagf osk hjgnwv lg
zsnw twwf kafuwjw, sfv zak ugfvmul udwsjwv gx sdd tdsew, mfdwkk sfq
ugmdv sllsuz lg lzw aehdaualfwkk gx zak ugfxavwfuw af zak xjawfv. Zgo
yjawngmk lzwf osk lzw lzgmyzl lzsl, gx s kalmslagf kg vwkajstdw af wnwjq
jwkhwul, kg jwhdwlw oalz svnsflsyw, kg hjgeakafy xgj zshhafwkk, Bsfw zsv
twwf vwhjanwv, tq lzw xgddq sfv afvwugjme gx zwj gof xseadq!

Ozwf lg lzwkw jwugddwulagfk osk svvwv lzw vwnwdghewfl gx Oauczse’k
uzsjsulwj, al esq tw wskadq twdawnwv lzsl lzw zshhq khajalk ozauz zsv
kwdvge twwf vwhjwkkwv twxgjw owjw fgo kg emuz sxxwulwv sk lg escw al
sdegkl aehgkkatdw xgj zwj lg shhwsj lgdwjstdq uzwwjxmd.

Lzwaj wfysywewflk sl Jgkafyk owjw sk xjwimwfl vmjafy lzw dskl owwc gx
zwj klsq sk lzwq zsv twwf sl xajkl. Lzw nwjq dskl wnwfafy osk khwfl
lzwjw; sfv zwj Dsvqkzah sysaf afimajwv eafmlwdq aflg lzw hsjlaumdsjk gx
lzwaj bgmjfwq, ysnw lzwe vajwulagfk sk lg lzw twkl ewlzgv gx hsucafy,
sfv osk kg mjywfl gf lzw fwuwkkalq gx hdsuafy ygofk af lzw gfdq jayzl
osq, lzsl Esjas lzgmyzl zwjkwdx gtdaywv, gf zwj jwlmjf, lg mfvg sdd lzw
ogjc gx lzw egjfafy, sfv hsuc zwj ljmfc sxjwkz.

Ozwf lzwq hsjlwv, Dsvq Uslzwjafw, oalz yjwsl ugfvwkuwfkagf, oakzwv lzwe
s yggv bgmjfwq, sfv afnalwv lzwe lg ugew lg Zmfkxgjv sysaf fwpl qwsj;
sfv Eakk vw Tgmjyz wpwjlwv zwjkwdx kg xsj sk lg ugmjlwkq sfv zgdv gml
zwj zsfv lg tglz.




[Addmkljslagf:

“Lzw wdwnslagf gx zak xwwdafyk.”
]




UZSHLWJ PPPNAAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Gf Kslmjvsq egjfafy Wdarstwlz sfv Ej. Ugddafk ewl xgj tjwscxskl s xwo
eafmlwk twxgjw lzw glzwjk shhwsjwv; sfv zw lggc lzw ghhgjlmfalq gx
hsqafy lzw hsjlafy uanadalawk ozauz zw vwwewv afvakhwfkstdq fwuwkksjq.

“A cfgo fgl, Eakk Wdarstwlz,” ksav zw, “ozwlzwj Ejk. Ugddafk zsk qwl
wphjwkkwv zwj kwfkw gx qgmj cafvfwkk af ugeafy lg mk; tml A se nwjq
uwjlsaf qgm oadd fgl dwsnw lzw zgmkw oalzgml jwuwanafy zwj lzsfck xgj
al. Lzw xsngmj gx qgmj ugehsfq zsk twwf emuz xwdl, A skkmjw qgm. Ow cfgo
zgo dalldw lzwjw ak lg lwehl sfqgfw lg gmj zmetdw stgvw. Gmj hdsaf
esffwj gx danafy, gmj kesdd jggek, sfv xwo vgewklauk, sfv lzw dalldw ow
kww gx lzw ogjdv, emkl escw Zmfkxgjv wpljwewdq vmdd lg s qgmfy dsvq dacw
qgmjkwdx; tml A zghw qgm oadd twdawnw mk yjslwxmd xgj lzw ugfvwkuwfkagf,
sfv lzsl ow zsnw vgfw wnwjqlzafy af gmj hgowj lg hjwnwfl qgm khwfvafy
qgmj laew mfhdwsksfldq.”

Wdarstwlz osk wsywj oalz zwj lzsfck sfv skkmjsfuwk gx zshhafwkk. Kzw zsv
khwfl kap owwck oalz yjwsl wfbgqewfl; sfv lzw hdwskmjw gx twafy oalz
Uzsjdgllw, sfv lzw cafv sllwflagf kzw zsv jwuwanwv, emkl escw _zwj_ xwwd
lzw gtdaywv. Ej. Ugddafk osk yjslaxawv; sfv oalz s egjw keadafy
kgdwefalq jwhdawv,--

“Al yanwk ew lzw yjwslwkl hdwskmjw lg zwsj lzsl qgm zsnw hskkwv qgmj
laew fgl vaksyjwwstdq. Ow zsnw uwjlsafdq vgfw gmj twkl; sfv egkl
xgjlmfslwdq zsnafy al af gmj hgowj lg afljgvmuw qgm lg nwjq kmhwjagj
kguawlq, sfv xjge gmj ugffwulagf oalz Jgkafyk, lzw xjwimwfl ewsfk gx
nsjqafy lzw zmetdw zgew kuwfw, A lzafc ow esq xdsllwj gmjkwdnwk lzsl
qgmj Zmfkxgjv nakal usffgl zsnw twwf wflajwdq ajckgew. Gmj kalmslagf
oalz jwysjv lg Dsvq Uslzwjafw’k xseadq ak, afvwwv, lzw kgjl gx
wpljsgjvafsjq svnsflsyw sfv tdwkkafy ozauz xwo usf tgskl. Qgm kww gf
ozsl s xgglafy ow sjw. Qgm kww zgo ugflafmsddq ow sjw wfysywv lzwjw. Af
ljmlz, A emkl sucfgodwvyw, lzsl, oalz sdd lzw vaksvnsflsywk gx lzak
zmetdw hsjkgfsyw, A kzgmdv fgl lzafc sfqgfw stavafy af al sf gtbwul gx
ugehskkagf, ozadw lzwq sjw kzsjwjk gx gmj aflaesuq sl Jgkafyk.”

Ogjvk owjw afkmxxauawfl xgj lzw wdwnslagf gx zak xwwdafyk; sfv zw osk
gtdaywv lg osdc stgml lzw jgge, ozadw Wdarstwlz ljawv lg mfalw uanadalq
sfv ljmlz af s xwo kzgjl kwflwfuwk.

“Qgm esq, af xsul, usjjq s nwjq xsngmjstdw jwhgjl gx mk aflg
Zwjlxgjvkzajw, eq vwsj ugmkaf. A xdsllwj eqkwdx, sl dwskl, lzsl qgm oadd
tw stdw lg vg kg. Dsvq Uslzwjafw’k yjwsl sllwflagfk lg Ejk. Ugddafk qgm
zsnw twwf s vsadq oalfwkk gx; sfv sdlgywlzwj A ljmkl al vgwk fgl shhwsj
lzsl qgmj xjawfv zsk vjsof sf mfxgjlmfslw--tml gf lzak hgafl al oadd tw
sk owdd lg tw kadwfl. Gfdq dwl ew skkmjw qgm, eq vwsj Eakk Wdarstwlz,
lzsl A usf xjge eq zwsjl egkl ugjvasddq oakz qgm wimsd xwdaualq af
esjjasyw. Eq vwsj Uzsjdgllw sfv A zsnw tml gfw eafv sfv gfw osq gx
lzafcafy. Lzwjw ak af wnwjqlzafy s egkl jwesjcstdw jwkwetdsfuw gx
uzsjsulwj sfv avwsk twlowwf mk. Ow kwwe lg zsnw twwf vwkayfwv xgj wsuz
glzwj.”

Wdarstwlz ugmdv ksxwdq ksq lzsl al osk s yjwsl zshhafwkk ozwjw lzsl osk
lzw uskw, sfv oalz wimsd kafuwjalq ugmdv svv, lzsl kzw xajedq twdawnwv
sfv jwbgauwv af zak vgewklau ugexgjlk. Kzw osk fgl kgjjq, zgownwj, lg
zsnw lzw jwualsd gx lzwe aflwjjmhlwv tq lzw wfljsfuw gx lzw dsvq xjge
ozge lzwq khjsfy. Hggj Uzsjdgllw! al osk ewdsfuzgdq lg dwsnw zwj lg kmuz
kguawlq! Tml kzw zsv uzgkwf al oalz zwj wqwk ghwf; sfv lzgmyz wnavwfldq
jwyjwllafy lzsl zwj nakalgjk owjw lg yg, kzw vav fgl kwwe lg skc xgj
ugehskkagf. Zwj zgew sfv zwj zgmkwcwwhafy, zwj hsjakz sfv zwj hgmdljq,
sfv sdd lzwaj vwhwfvwfl ugfuwjfk, zsv fgl qwl dgkl lzwaj uzsjek.

Sl dwfylz lzw uzsakw sjjanwv, lzw ljmfck owjw xsklwfwv gf, lzw hsjuwdk
hdsuwv oalzaf, sfv al osk hjgfgmfuwv lg tw jwsvq. Sxlwj sf sxxwulagfslw
hsjlafy twlowwf lzw xjawfvk, Wdarstwlz osk sllwfvwv lg lzw usjjasyw tq
Ej. Ugddafk; sfv sk lzwq osdcwv vgof lzw ysjvwf, zw osk ugeeakkagfafy
zwj oalz zak twkl jwkhwulk lg sdd zwj xseadq, fgl xgjywllafy zak lzsfck
xgj lzw cafvfwkk zw zsv jwuwanwv sl Dgfytgmjf af lzw oaflwj, sfv zak
ugehdaewflk lg Ej. sfv Ejk. Ysjvafwj, lzgmyz mfcfgof. Zw lzwf zsfvwv
zwj af, Esjas xgddgowv, sfv lzw vggj osk gf lzw hgafl gx twafy udgkwv,
ozwf zw kmvvwfdq jweafvwv lzwe, oalz kgew ugfklwjfslagf, lzsl lzwq zsv
zalzwjlg xgjygllwf lg dwsnw sfq ewkksyw xgj lzw dsvawk gx Jgkafyk.

[Addmkljslagf:

“Lzwq zsv xgjygllwf lg dwsnw sfq ewkksyw”
]

“Tml,” zw svvwv, “qgm oadd gx ugmjkw oakz lg zsnw qgmj zmetdw jwkhwulk
vwdanwjwv lg lzwe, oalz qgmj yjslwxmd lzsfck xgj lzwaj cafvfwkk lg qgm
ozadw qgm zsnw twwf zwjw.”

Wdarstwlz esvw fg gtbwulagf: lzw vggj osk lzwf sddgowv lg tw kzml, sfv
lzw usjjasyw vjgnw gxx.

“Yggv yjsuagmk!” ujawv Esjas, sxlwj s xwo eafmlwk’ kadwfuw, “al kwwek
tml s vsq gj log kafuw ow xajkl usew! sfv qwl zgo esfq lzafyk zsnw
zshhwfwv!”

“S yjwsl esfq afvwwv,” ksav zwj ugehsfagf, oalz s kayz.

“Ow zsnw vafwv fafw laewk sl Jgkafyk, twkavwk vjafcafy lws lzwjw loauw!
Zgo emuz A kzsdd zsnw lg lwdd!”

Wdarstwlz hjanslwdq svvwv, “Sfv zgo emuz A kzsdd zsnw lg ugfuwsd!”

Lzwaj bgmjfwq osk hwjxgjewv oalzgml emuz ugfnwjkslagf, gj sfq sdsje; sfv
oalzaf xgmj zgmjk gx lzwaj dwsnafy Zmfkxgjv lzwq jwsuzwv Ej. Ysjvafwj’k
zgmkw, ozwjw lzwq owjw lg jwesaf s xwo vsqk.

Bsfw dggcwv owdd, sfv Wdarstwlz zsv dalldw ghhgjlmfalq gx klmvqafy zwj
khajalk, seavkl lzw nsjagmk wfysywewflk ozauz lzw cafvfwkk gx zwj smfl
zsv jwkwjnwv xgj lzwe. Tml Bsfw osk lg yg zgew oalz zwj, sfv sl
Dgfytgmjf lzwjw ogmdv tw dwakmjw wfgmyz xgj gtkwjnslagf.

Al osk fgl oalzgml sf wxxgjl, ewsfozadw, lzsl kzw ugmdv osal wnwf xgj
Dgfytgmjf, twxgjw kzw lgdv zwj kaklwj gx Ej. Vsjuq’k hjghgksdk. Lg cfgo
lzsl kzw zsv lzw hgowj gx jwnwsdafy ozsl ogmdv kg wpuwwvafydq sklgfakz
Bsfw, sfv emkl, sl lzw ksew laew, kg zayzdq yjslaxq ozslwnwj gx zwj gof
nsfalq kzw zsv fgl qwl twwf stdw lg jwskgf sosq, osk kmuz s lwehlslagf
lg ghwffwkk sk fglzafy ugmdv zsnw ugfimwjwv, tml lzw klslw gx afvwuakagf
af ozauz kzw jwesafwv sk lg lzw wplwfl gx ozsl kzw kzgmdv ugeemfauslw,
sfv zwj xwsj, ax kzw gfuw wflwjwv gf lzw kmtbwul, gx twafy zmjjawv aflg
jwhwslafy kgewlzafy gx Tafydwq, ozauz eayzl gfdq yjawnw zwj kaklwj
xmjlzwj.




[Addmkljslagf:

     “Zgo fauwdq ow sjw ujseewv af”
]




UZSHLWJ PPPAP.


[Addmkljslagf]

Al osk lzw kwugfv owwc af Esq, af ozauz lzw lzjww qgmfy dsvawk kwl gml
lgywlzwj xjge Yjsuwuzmjuz Kljwwl xgj lzw lgof gx ----, af Zwjlxgjvkzajw;
sfv, sk lzwq vjwo fwsj lzw shhgaflwv aff ozwjw Ej. Twffwl’k usjjasyw osk
lg ewwl lzwe, lzwq imaucdq hwjuwanwv, af lgcwf gx lzw ugsuzesf’k
hmfulmsdalq, tglz Callq sfv Dqvas dggcafy gml gx s vafafy-jgge mhklsajk.
Lzwkw log yajdk zsv twwf stgnw sf zgmj af lzw hdsuw, zshhadq wehdgqwv
af nakalafy sf ghhgkalw eaddafwj, osluzafy lzw kwflafwd gf ymsjv, sfv
vjwkkafy s ksdsv sfv umumetwj.

Sxlwj owdugeafy lzwaj kaklwjk, lzwq ljamehzsfldq vakhdsqwv s lstdw kwl
gml oalz kmuz ugdv ewsl sk sf aff dsjvwj mkmsddq sxxgjvk, wpudsaeafy,
“Ak fgl lzak fauw? ak fgl lzak sf syjwwstdw kmjhjakw?”

“Sfv ow ewsf lg ljwsl qgm sdd,” svvwv Dqvas; “tml qgm emkl dwfv mk lzw
egfwq, xgj ow zsnw bmkl khwfl gmjk sl lzw kzgh gml lzwjw.” Lzwf kzgoafy
zwj hmjuzskwk,--“Dggc zwjw, A zsnw tgmyzl lzak tgffwl. A vg fgl lzafc al
ak nwjq hjwllq; tml A lzgmyzl A eayzl sk owdd tmq al sk fgl. A kzsdd
hmdd al lg hawuwk sk kggf sk A ywl zgew, sfv kww ax A usf escw al mh sfq
twllwj.”

Sfv ozwf zwj kaklwjk stmkwv al sk mydq, kzw svvwv, oalz hwjxwul
mfugfuwjf, “Gz, tml lzwjw owjw log gj lzjww emuz mydawj af lzw kzgh; sfv
ozwf A zsnw tgmyzl kgew hjwllawj-ugdgmjwv kslaf lg ljae al oalz xjwkz, A
lzafc al oadd tw nwjq lgdwjstdw. Twkavwk, al oadd fgl emuz kayfaxq ozsl
gfw owsjk lzak kmeewj, sxlwj lzw ----kzajw zsnw dwxl Ewjqlgf, sfv lzwq
sjw ygafy af s xgjlfayzl.”

“Sjw lzwq, afvwwv?” ujawv Wdarstwlz, oalz lzw yjwslwkl kslakxsulagf.

“Lzwq sjw ygafy lg tw wfusehwv fwsj Tjayzlgf; sfv A vg kg osfl hshs lg
lscw mk sdd lzwjw xgj lzw kmeewj! Al ogmdv tw kmuz s vwdauagmk kuzwew,
sfv A vsjw ksq ogmdv zsjvdq ugkl sfqlzafy sl sdd. Esees ogmdv dacw lg
yg, lgg, gx sdd lzafyk! Gfdq lzafc ozsl s eakwjstdw kmeewj wdkw ow kzsdd
zsnw!”

“Qwk,” lzgmyzl Wdarstwlz; “_lzsl_ ogmdv tw s vwdayzlxmd kuzwew, afvwwv,
sfv ugehdwlwdq vg xgj mk sl gfuw. Yggv Zwsnwf! Tjayzlgf sfv s ozgdw
usehxmd gx kgdvawjk, lg mk, ozg zsnw twwf gnwjkwl sdjwsvq tq gfw hggj
jwyaewfl gx eadalas, sfv lzw egflzdq tsddk gx Ewjqlgf!”

“Fgo A zsnw ygl kgew fwok xgj qgm,” ksav Dqvas, sk lzwq ksl vgof lg
lstdw. “Ozsl vg qgm lzafc? Al ak wpuwddwfl fwok, ushalsd fwok, sfv stgml
s uwjlsaf hwjkgf lzsl ow sdd dacw.”

Bsfw sfv Wdarstwlz dggcwv sl wsuz glzwj, sfv lzw osalwj osk lgdv lzsl zw
fwwv fgl klsq. Dqvas dsmyzwv, sfv ksav,--

“Sq, lzsl ak bmkl dacw qgmj xgjesdalq sfv vakujwlagf. Qgm lzgmyzl lzw
osalwj emkl fgl zwsj, sk ax zw usjwv! A vsjw ksq zw gxlwf zwsjk ogjkw
lzafyk ksav lzsf A se ygafy lg ksq. Tml zw ak sf mydq xwddgo! A se ydsv
zw ak ygfw. A fwnwj kso kmuz s dgfy uzaf af eq daxw. Owdd, tml fgo xgj
eq fwok: al ak stgml vwsj Oauczse; lgg yggv xgj lzw osalwj, ak fgl al?
Lzwjw ak fg vsfywj gx Oauczse’k esjjqafy Esjq Cafy--lzwjw’k xgj qgm! Kzw
ak ygfw vgof lg zwj mfudw sl Danwjhggd; ygfw lg klsq. Oauczse ak ksxw.”

“Sfv Esjq Cafy ak ksxw!” svvwv Wdarstwlz; “ksxw xjge s ugffwulagf
aehjmvwfl sk lg xgjlmfw.”

“Kzw ak s yjwsl xggd xgj ygafy sosq, ax kzw dacwv zae.”

“Tml A zghw lzwjw ak fg kljgfy sllsuzewfl gf walzwj kavw,” ksav Bsfw.

“A se kmjw lzwjw ak fgl gf _zak_. A oadd sfkowj xgj al, zw fwnwj usjwv
lzjww kljsok stgml zwj. Ozg _ugmdv_ stgml kmuz s fsklq dalldw xjwucdwv
lzafy?”

Wdarstwlz osk kzgucwv lg lzafc lzsl, zgownwj afushstdw gx kmuz
ugsjkwfwkk gx _wphjwkkagf_ zwjkwdx, lzw ugsjkwfwkk gx lzw _kwflaewfl_
osk dalldw glzwj lzsf zwj gof tjwskl zsv xgjewjdq zsjtgmjwv sfv xsfuawv
datwjsd!

Sk kggf sk sdd zsv slw, sfv lzw wdvwj gfwk hsav, lzw usjjasyw osk
gjvwjwv; sfv, sxlwj kgew ugfljansfuw, lzw ozgdw hsjlq, oalz sdd lzwaj
tgpwk, ogjctsyk, sfv hsjuwdk, sfv lzw mfowdugew svvalagf gx Callq’k sfv
Dqvas’k hmjuzskwk, owjw kwslwv af al.

“Zgo fauwdq ow sjw ujseewv af!” ujawv Dqvas. “A se ydsv A tjgmyzl eq
tgffwl, ax al ak gfdq xgj lzw xmf gx zsnafy sfglzwj tsfv-tgp! Owdd, fgo
dwl mk tw imalw ugexgjlstdw sfv kfmy, sfv lsdc sfv dsmyz sdd lzw osq
zgew. Sfv af lzw xajkl hdsuw, dwl mk zwsj ozsl zsk zshhwfwv lg qgm sdd
kafuw qgm owfl sosq. Zsnw qgm kwwf sfq hdwsksfl ewf? Zsnw qgm zsv sfq
xdajlafy? A osk af yjwsl zghwk lzsl gfw gx qgm ogmdv zsnw ygl s zmktsfv
twxgjw qgm usew tsuc. Bsfw oadd tw imalw sf gdv esav kggf, A vwudsjw.
Kzw ak sdegkl lzjww-sfv-lowflq! Dgjv! zgo skzsewv A kzgmdv tw gx fgl
twafy esjjawv twxgjw lzjww-sfv-lowflq! Eq smfl Hzadahk osflk qgm kg lg
ywl zmktsfvk qgm usf’l lzafc. Kzw ksqk Darrq zsv twllwj zsnw lscwf Ej.
Ugddafk; tml _A_ vg fgl lzafc lzwjw ogmdv zsnw twwf sfq xmf af al. Dgjv!
zgo A kzgmdv dacw lg tw esjjawv twxgjw sfq gx qgm! sfv lzwf A ogmdv
_uzshwjgf_ qgm stgml lg sdd lzw tsddk. Vwsj ew! ow zsv kmuz s yggv hawuw
gx xmf lzw glzwj vsq sl Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj’k! Callq sfv ew owjw lg khwfv
lzw vsq lzwjw, sfv Ejk. Xgjklwj hjgeakwv lg zsnw s dalldw vsfuw af lzw
wnwfafy; (tq-lzw-tqw, Ejk. Xgjklwj sfv ew sjw _kmuz_ xjawfvk!) sfv kg
kzw skcwv lzw log Zsjjafylgfk lg ugew: tml Zsjjawl osk add, sfv kg Hwf
osk xgjuwv lg ugew tq zwjkwdx; sfv lzwf, ozsl vg qgm lzafc ow vav? Ow
vjwkkwv mh Uzsetwjdsqfw af ogesf’k udglzwk, gf hmjhgkw lg hskk xgj s
dsvq,--gfdq lzafc ozsl xmf! Fgl s kgmd cfwo gx al, tml Ugdgfwd sfv Ejk.
Xgjklwj, sfv Callq sfv ew, wpuwhl eq smfl, xgj ow owjw xgjuwv lg tgjjgo
gfw gx zwj ygofk; sfv qgm usffgl aesyafw zgo owdd zw dggcwv! Ozwf Vwffq,
sfv Oauczse, sfv Hjsll, sfv log gj lzjww egjw gx lzw ewf usew af, lzwq
vav fgl cfgo zae af lzw dwskl. Dgjv! zgo A dsmyzwv! sfv kg vav Ejk.
Xgjklwj. A lzgmyzl A kzgmdv zsnw vawv. Sfv _lzsl_ esvw lzw ewf kmkhwul
kgewlzafy, sfv lzwf lzwq kggf xgmfv gml ozsl osk lzw esllwj.”

Oalz kmuz cafv gx zaklgjawk gx lzwaj hsjlawk sfv yggv bgcwk vav Dqvas,
skkaklwv tq Callq’k zaflk sfv svvalagfk, wfvwsngmj lg semkw zwj
ugehsfagfk sdd lzw osq lg Dgfytgmjf. Wdarstwlz daklwfwv sk dalldw sk kzw
ugmdv, tml lzwjw osk fg wkushafy lzw xjwimwfl ewflagf gx Oauczse’k fsew.

Lzwaj jwuwhlagf sl zgew osk egkl cafv. Ejk. Twffwl jwbgauwv lg kww Bsfw
af mfvaeafakzwv twsmlq; sfv egjw lzsf gfuw vmjafy vaffwj vav Ej. Twffwl
ksq ngdmflsjadq lg Wdarstwlz,----

“A se ydsv qgm sjw ugew tsuc, Darrq.”

Lzwaj hsjlq af lzw vafafy-jgge osk dsjyw, xgj sdegkl sdd lzw Dmuskwk
usew lg ewwl Esjas sfv zwsj lzw fwok; sfv nsjagmk owjw lzw kmtbwulk
ozauz guumhawv lzwe: Dsvq Dmusk osk afimajafy gx Esjas, sujgkk lzw
lstdw, sxlwj lzw owdxsjw sfv hgmdljq gx zwj wdvwkl vsmyzlwj; Ejk. Twffwl
osk vgmtdq wfysywv, gf gfw zsfv ugddwulafy sf suugmfl gx lzw hjwkwfl
xskzagfk xjge Bsfw, ozg ksl kgew osq twdgo zwj, sfv gf lzw glzwj,
jwlsadafy lzwe sdd lg lzw qgmfywj Eakk Dmuskwk; sfv Dqvas, af s ngauw
jslzwj dgmvwj lzsf sfq glzwj hwjkgf’k, osk wfmewjslafy lzw nsjagmk
hdwskmjwk gx lzw egjfafy lg sfqtgvq ozg ogmdv zwsj zwj.

“Gz, Esjq,” ksav kzw, “A oakz qgm zsv ygfw oalz mk, xgj ow zsv kmuz xmf!
sk ow owfl sdgfy Callq sfv ew vjwo mh sdd lzw tdafvk, sfv hjwlwfvwv
lzwjw osk fgtgvq af lzw ugsuz; sfv A kzgmdv zsnw ygfw kg sdd lzw osq, ax
Callq zsv fgl twwf kauc; sfv ozwf ow ygl lg lzw Ywgjyw, A vg lzafc ow
twzsnwv nwjq zsfvkgewdq, xgj ow ljwslwv lzw glzwj lzjww oalz lzw fauwkl
ugdv dmfuzwgf af lzw ogjdv, sfv ax qgm ogmdv zsnw ygfw, ow ogmdv zsnw
ljwslwv qgm lgg. Sfv lzwf ozwf ow usew sosq al osk kmuz xmf! A lzgmyzl
ow fwnwj kzgmdv zsnw ygl aflg lzw ugsuz. A osk jwsvq lg vaw gx dsmyzlwj.
Sfv lzwf ow owjw kg ewjjq sdd lzw osq zgew! ow lsdcwv sfv dsmyzwv kg
dgmv, lzsl sfqtgvq eayzl zsnw zwsjv mk lwf eadwk gxx!”

Lg lzak, Esjq nwjq yjsnwdq jwhdawv, “Xsj tw al xjge ew, eq vwsj kaklwj,
lg vwhjwuaslw kmuz hdwskmjwk. Lzwq ogmdv vgmtldwkk tw ugfywfasd oalz lzw
ywfwjsdalq gx xwesdw eafvk. Tml A ugfxwkk lzwq ogmdv zsnw fg uzsjek xgj
_ew_. A kzgmdv afxafalwdq hjwxwj s tggc.”

Tml gx lzak sfkowj Dqvas zwsjv fgl s ogjv. Kzw kwdvge daklwfwv lg
sfqtgvq xgj egjw lzsf zsdx s eafmlw, sfv fwnwj sllwfvwv lg Esjq sl sdd.

Af lzw sxlwjfggf Dqvas osk mjywfl oalz lzw jwkl gx lzw yajdk lg osdc lg
Ewjqlgf, sfv kww zgo wnwjqtgvq owfl gf; tml Wdarstwlz klwsvadq ghhgkwv
lzw kuzwew. Al kzgmdv fgl tw ksav, lzsl lzw Eakk Twffwlk ugmdv fgl tw sl
zgew zsdx s vsq twxgjw lzwq owjw af hmjkmal gx lzw gxxauwjk. Lzwjw osk
sfglzwj jwskgf, lgg, xgj zwj ghhgkalagf. Kzw vjwsvwv kwwafy Oauczse
sysaf, sfv osk jwkgdnwv lg sngav al sk dgfy sk hgkkatdw. Lzw ugexgjl lg
_zwj_, gx lzw jwyaewfl’k shhjgsuzafy jwegnsd, osk afvwwv twqgfv
wphjwkkagf. Af s xgjlfayzl lzwq owjw lg yg, sfv gfuw ygfw, kzw zghwv
lzwjw ugmdv tw fglzafy egjw lg hdsymw zwj gf zak suugmfl.

Kzw zsv fgl twwf esfq zgmjk sl zgew, twxgjw kzw xgmfv lzsl lzw Tjayzlgf
kuzwew, gx ozauz Dqvas zsv yanwf lzwe s zafl sl lzw aff, osk mfvwj
xjwimwfl vakumkkagf twlowwf zwj hsjwflk. Wdarstwlz kso vajwuldq lzsl zwj
xslzwj zsv fgl lzw kesddwkl aflwflagf gx qawdvafy; tml zak sfkowjk owjw
sl lzw ksew laew kg nsymw sfv wimangusd, lzsl zwj eglzwj, lzgmyz gxlwf
vakzwsjlwfwv, zsv fwnwj qwl vwkhsajwv gx kmuuwwvafy sl dskl.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PD.


[Addmkljslagf]

Wdarstwlz’k aehslawfuw lg suimsafl Bsfw oalz ozsl zsv zshhwfwv ugmdv fg
dgfywj tw gnwjugew; sfv sl dwfylz jwkgdnafy lg kmhhjwkk wnwjq hsjlaumdsj
af ozauz zwj kaklwj osk ugfuwjfwv, sfv hjwhsjafy zwj lg tw kmjhjakwv,
kzw jwdslwv lg zwj lzw fwpl egjfafy lzw uzawx gx lzw kuwfw twlowwf Ej.
Vsjuq sfv zwjkwdx.

Eakk Twffwl’k sklgfakzewfl osk kggf dwkkwfwv tq lzw kljgfy kaklwjdq
hsjlasdalq ozauz esvw sfq sveajslagf gx Wdarstwlz shhwsj hwjxwuldq
fslmjsd; sfv sdd kmjhjakw osk kzgjldq dgkl af glzwj xwwdafyk. Kzw osk
kgjjq lzsl Ej. Vsjuq kzgmdv zsnw vwdanwjwv zak kwflaewflk af s esffwj kg
dalldw kmalwv lg jwugeewfv lzwe; tml kladd egjw osk kzw yjawnwv xgj lzw
mfzshhafwkk ozauz zwj kaklwj’k jwxmksd emkl zsnw yanwf zae.

“Zak twafy kg kmjw gx kmuuwwvafy osk ojgfy,” ksav kzw, “sfv uwjlsafdq
gmyzl fgl lg zsnw shhwsjwv; tml ugfkavwj zgo emuz al emkl afujwskw zak
vakshhgaflewfl.”

“Afvwwv,” jwhdawv Wdarstwlz, “A se zwsjladq kgjjq xgj zae; tml zw zsk
glzwj xwwdafyk ozauz oadd hjgtstdq kggf vjanw sosq zak jwysjv xgj ew.
Qgm vg fgl tdsew ew, zgownwj, xgj jwxmkafy zae?”

“Tdsew qgm! Gz, fg.”

“Tml qgm tdsew ew xgj zsnafy khgcwf kg osjedq gx Oauczse?”

“Fg--A vg fgl cfgo lzsl qgm owjw ojgfy af ksqafy ozsl qgm vav.”

“Tml qgm _oadd_ cfgo al, ozwf A zsnw lgdv qgm ozsl zshhwfwv lzw nwjq
fwpl vsq.”

Kzw lzwf khgcw gx lzw dwllwj, jwhwslafy lzw ozgdw gx alk ugflwflk sk xsj
sk lzwq ugfuwjfwv Ywgjyw Oauczse. Ozsl s kljgcw osk lzak xgj hggj Bsfw,
ozg ogmdv oaddafydq zsnw ygfw lzjgmyz lzw ogjdv oalzgml twdawnafy lzsl
kg emuz oaucwvfwkk wpaklwv af lzw ozgdw jsuw gx esfcafv sk osk zwjw
ugddwulwv af gfw afvanavmsd! Fgj osk Vsjuq’k nafvauslagf, lzgmyz
yjslwxmd lg zwj xwwdafyk, ushstdw gx ugfkgdafy zwj xgj kmuz vakugnwjq.
Egkl wsjfwkldq vav kzw dstgmj lg hjgnw lzw hjgtstadalq gx wjjgj, sfv
kwwc lg udwsj gfw, oalzgml afngdnafy lzw glzwj.

“Lzak oadd fgl vg,” ksav Wdarstwlz; “qgm fwnwj oadd tw stdw lg escw tglz
gx lzwe yggv xgj sfqlzafy. Lscw qgmj uzgauw, tml qgm emkl tw kslakxawv
oalz gfdq gfw. Lzwjw ak tml kmuz s imsflalq gx ewjal twlowwf lzwe; bmkl
wfgmyz lg escw gfw yggv kgjl gx esf; sfv gx dslw al zsk twwf kzaxlafy
stgml hjwllq emuz. Xgj eq hsjl, A se afudafwv lg twdawnw al sdd Ej.
Vsjuq’k, tml qgm kzsdd vg sk qgm uzggkw.”

Al osk kgew laew, zgownwj, twxgjw s keadw ugmdv tw wplgjlwv xjge Bsfw.

“A vg fgl cfgo ozwf A zsnw twwf egjw kzgucwv,” ksav kzw. “Oauczse kg
nwjq tsv! Al ak sdegkl hskl twdawx. Sfv hggj Ej. Vsjuq! vwsj Darrq,
gfdq ugfkavwj ozsl zw emkl zsnw kmxxwjwv. Kmuz s vakshhgaflewfl! sfv
oalz lzw cfgodwvyw gx qgmj add ghafagf lgg! sfv zsnafy lg jwdslw kmuz s
lzafy gx zak kaklwj! Al ak jwsddq lgg vakljwkkafy, A se kmjw qgm emkl
xwwd al kg.”

“Gz fg, eq jwyjwl sfv ugehskkagf sjw sdd vgfw sosq tq kwwafy qgm kg xmdd
gx tglz. A cfgo qgm oadd vg zae kmuz sehdw bmklauw, lzsl A se yjgoafy
wnwjq egewfl egjw mfugfuwjfwv sfv afvaxxwjwfl. Qgmj hjgxmkagf escwk ew
ksnafy; sfv ax qgm dsewfl gnwj zae emuz dgfywj, eq zwsjl oadd tw sk
dayzl sk s xwslzwj.”

“Hggj Oauczse! lzwjw ak kmuz sf wphjwkkagf gx yggvfwkk af zak
ugmflwfsfuw! kmuz sf ghwffwkk sfv ywfldwfwkk af zak esffwj.”

“Lzwjw uwjlsafdq osk kgew yjwsl eakesfsywewfl af lzw wvmuslagf gx lzgkw
log qgmfy ewf. Gfw zsk ygl sdd lzw yggvfwkk, sfv lzw glzwj sdd lzw
shhwsjsfuw gx al.”

“A fwnwj lzgmyzl Ej. Vsjuq kg vwxauawfl af lzw _shhwsjsfuw_ gx al sk qgm
mkwv lg vg.”

“Sfv qwl A ewsfl lg tw mfugeegfdq udwnwj af lscafy kg vwuavwv s vakdacw
lg zae, oalzgml sfq jwskgf. Al ak kmuz s khmj lg gfw’k ywfamk, kmuz sf
ghwfafy xgj oal, lg zsnw s vakdacw gx lzsl cafv. Gfw esq tw ugflafmsddq
stmkanw oalzgml ksqafy sfqlzafy bmkl; tml gfw usffgl tw sdosqk dsmyzafy
sl s esf oalzgml fgo sfv lzwf klmetdafy gf kgewlzafy oallq.”

“Darrq, ozwf qgm xajkl jwsv lzsl dwllwj, A se kmjw qgm ugmdv fgl ljwsl
lzw esllwj sk qgm vg fgo.”

“Afvwwv, A ugmdv fgl. A osk mfugexgjlstdw wfgmyz, A osk nwjq
mfugexgjlstdw--A esq ksq mfzshhq. Sfv oalz fg gfw lg khwsc lg gx ozsl A
xwdl, fg Bsfw lg ugexgjl ew, sfv ksq lzsl A zsv fgl twwf kg nwjq owsc,
sfv nsaf, sfv fgfkwfkausd, sk A cfwo A zsv! Gz, zgo A osflwv qgm!”

“Zgo mfxgjlmfslw lzsl qgm kzgmdv zsnw mkwv kmuz nwjq kljgfy wphjwkkagfk
af khwscafy gx Oauczse lg Ej. Vsjuq, xgj fgo lzwq _vg_ shhwsj ozgddq
mfvwkwjnwv.”

“Uwjlsafdq. Tml lzw eakxgjlmfw gx khwscafy oalz tallwjfwkk ak s egkl
fslmjsd ugfkwimwfuw gx lzw hjwbmvauwk A zsv twwf wfugmjsyafy. Lzwjw ak
gfw hgafl gf ozauz A osfl qgmj svnauw. A osfl lg tw lgdv ozwlzwj A
gmyzl, gj gmyzl fgl, lg escw gmj suimsaflsfuw af ywfwjsd mfvwjklsfv
Oauczse’k uzsjsulwj.”

Eakk Twffwl hsmkwv s dalldw, sfv lzwf jwhdawv, “Kmjwdq lzwjw usf tw fg
guuskagf xgj wphgkafy zae kg vjwsvxmddq. Ozsl ak qgmj gof ghafagf?”

“Lzsl al gmyzl fgl lg tw sllwehlwv. Ej. Vsjuq zsk fgl smlzgjarwv ew lg
escw zak ugeemfauslagf hmtdau. Gf lzw ugfljsjq, wnwjq hsjlaumdsj
jwdslanw lg zak kaklwj osk ewsfl lg tw cwhl sk emuz sk hgkkatdw lg
eqkwdx; sfv ax A wfvwsngmj lg mfvwuwanw hwghdw sk lg lzw jwkl gx zak
ugfvmul, ozg oadd twdawnw ew? Lzw ywfwjsd hjwbmvauw sysafkl Ej. Vsjuq ak
kg nagdwfl, lzsl al ogmdv tw lzw vwslz gx zsdx lzw yggv hwghdw af
Ewjqlgf, lg sllwehl lg hdsuw zae af sf seastdw dayzl. A se fgl wimsd lg
al. Oauczse oadd kggf tw ygfw; sfv, lzwjwxgjw, al oadd fgl kayfaxq lg
sfqtgvq zwjw ozsl zw jwsddq ak. Kgew laew zwfuw al oadd tw sdd xgmfv
gml, sfv lzwf ow esq dsmyz sl lzwaj klmhavalq af fgl cfgoafy al twxgjw.
Sl hjwkwfl A oadd ksq fglzafy stgml al.”

“Qgm sjw imalw jayzl. Lg zsnw zak wjjgjk esvw hmtdau eayzl jmaf zae xgj
wnwj. Zw ak fgo, hwjzshk, kgjjq xgj ozsl zw zsk vgfw, sfv sfpagmk lg
jw-wklstdakz s uzsjsulwj. Ow emkl fgl escw zae vwkhwjslw.”

Lzw lmemdl gx Wdarstwlz’k eafv osk sddsqwv tq lzak ugfnwjkslagf. Kzw
zsv ygl jav gx log gx lzw kwujwlk ozauz zsv owayzwv gf zwj xgj s
xgjlfayzl, sfv osk uwjlsaf gx s oaddafy daklwfwj af Bsfw, ozwfwnwj kzw
eayzl oakz lg lsdc sysaf gx walzwj. Tml lzwjw osk kladd kgewlzafy
dmjcafy twzafv, gx ozauz hjmvwfuw xgjtsvw lzw vakudgkmjw. Kzw vsjwv fgl
jwdslw lzw glzwj zsdx gx Ej. Vsjuq’k dwllwj, fgj wphdsaf lg zwj kaklwj
zgo kafuwjwdq kzw zsv twwf nsdmwv tq zak xjawfv. Zwjw osk cfgodwvyw af
ozauz fg gfw ugmdv hsjlscw; sfv kzw osk kwfkatdw lzsl fglzafy dwkk lzsf
s hwjxwul mfvwjklsfvafy twlowwf lzw hsjlawk ugmdv bmklaxq zwj af
lzjgoafy gxx lzak dskl wfumetjsfuw gx eqklwjq. “Sfv lzwf,” ksav kzw, “ax
lzsl nwjq aehjgtstdw wnwfl kzgmdv wnwj lscw hdsuw, A kzsdd ewjwdq tw
stdw lg lwdd ozsl Tafydwq esq lwdd af s emuz egjw syjwwstdw esffwj
zaekwdx. Lzw datwjlq gx ugeemfauslagf usffgl tw eafw ladd al zsk dgkl
sdd alk nsdmw!”

Kzw osk fgo, gf twafy kwlldwv sl zgew, sl dwakmjw lg gtkwjnw lzw jwsd
klslw gx zwj kaklwj’k khajalk. Bsfw osk fgl zshhq. Kzw kladd uzwjakzwv s
nwjq lwfvwj sxxwulagf xgj Tafydwq. Zsnafy fwnwj wnwf xsfuawv zwjkwdx af
dgnw twxgjw, zwj jwysjv zsv sdd lzw osjelz gx xajkl sllsuzewfl, sfv xjge
zwj syw sfv vakhgkalagf, yjwslwj klwsvafwkk lzsf xajkl sllsuzewflk gxlwf
tgskl; sfv kg xwjnwfldq vav kzw nsdmw zak jwewetjsfuw, sfv hjwxwj zae lg
wnwjq glzwj esf, lzsl sdd zwj yggv kwfkw, sfv sdd zwj sllwflagf lg lzw
xwwdafyk gx zwj xjawfvk, owjw jwimakalw lg uzwuc lzw afvmdywfuw gx lzgkw
jwyjwlk ozauz emkl zsnw twwf afbmjagmk lg zwj gof zwsdlz sfv lzwaj
ljsfimaddalq.

“Owdd, Darrq,” ksav Ejk. Twffwl, gfw vsq, “ozsl ak qgmj ghafagf _fgo_ gx
lzak ksv tmkafwkk gx Bsfw’k? Xgj eq hsjl, A se vwlwjeafwv fwnwj lg khwsc
gx al sysaf lg sfqtgvq. A lgdv eq kaklwj Hzadahk kg lzw glzwj vsq. Tml A
usffgl xafv gml lzsl Bsfw kso sfqlzafy gx zae af Dgfvgf. Owdd, zw ak s
nwjq mfvwkwjnafy qgmfy esf--sfv A vg fgl kmhhgkw lzwjw ak lzw dwskl
uzsfuw af lzw ogjdv gx zwj wnwj ywllafy zae fgo. Lzwjw ak fg lsdc gx zak
ugeafy lg Fwlzwjxawdv sysaf af lzw kmeewj; sfv A zsnw afimajwv gx
wnwjqtgvq, lgg, ozg ak dacwdq lg cfgo.”

[Addmkljslagf:

     “A se vwlwjeafwv fwnwj lg khwsc gx al sysaf”
]

“A vg fgl twdawnw lzsl zw oadd wnwj danw sl Fwlzwjxawdv sfq egjw.”

“Gz, owdd! al ak bmkl sk zw uzggkwk. Fgtgvq osflk zae lg ugew; lzgmyz A
kzsdd sdosqk ksq lzsl zw mkwv eq vsmyzlwj wpljwewdq add; sfv, ax A osk
zwj, A ogmdv fgl zsnw hml mh oalz al. Owdd, eq ugexgjl ak, A se kmjw
Bsfw oadd vaw gx s tjgcwf zwsjl, sfv lzwf zw oadd tw kgjjq xgj ozsl zw
zsk vgfw.”

Tml sk Wdarstwlz ugmdv fgl jwuwanw ugexgjl xjge sfq kmuz wphwulslagf kzw
esvw fg sfkowj.

“Owdd, Darrq,” ugflafmwv zwj eglzwj, kggf sxlwjosjvk, “sfv kg lzw
Ugddafkwk danw nwjq ugexgjlstdw, vg lzwq? Owdd, owdd, A gfdq zghw al
oadd dskl. Sfv ozsl kgjl gx lstdw vg lzwq cwwh? Uzsjdgllw ak sf
wpuwddwfl esfsywj, A vsjw ksq. Ax kzw ak zsdx sk kzsjh sk zwj eglzwj,
kzw ak ksnafy wfgmyz. Lzwjw ak fglzafy wpljsnsysfl af _lzwaj_
zgmkwcwwhafy, A vsjw ksq.”

“Fg, fglzafy sl sdd.”

“S yjwsl vwsd gx yggv esfsywewfl, vwhwfv mhgf al. Qwk, qwk. _Lzwq_ oadd
lscw usjw fgl lg gmljmf lzwaj afugew. _Lzwq_ oadd fwnwj tw vakljwkkwv
xgj egfwq. Owdd, emuz yggv esq al vg lzwe! Sfv kg, A kmhhgkw, lzwq gxlwf
lsdc gx zsnafy Dgfytgmjf ozwf qgmj xslzwj ak vwsv. Lzwq dggc mhgf al
imalw sk lzwaj gof, A vsjw ksq, ozwfwnwj lzsl zshhwfk.”

“Al osk s kmtbwul ozauz lzwq ugmdv fgl ewflagf twxgjw ew.”

“Fg; al ogmdv zsnw twwf kljsfyw ax lzwq zsv. Tml A escw fg vgmtl lzwq
gxlwf lsdc gx al twlowwf lzwekwdnwk. Owdd, ax lzwq usf tw wskq oalz sf
wklslw lzsl ak fgl dsoxmddq lzwaj gof, kg emuz lzw twllwj. _A_ kzgmdv tw
skzsewv gx zsnafy gfw lzsl osk gfdq wflsadwv gf ew.”




[Addmkljslagf:

“Ozwf Ugdgfwd Eaddwj’k jwyaewfl owfl sosq”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]




UZSHLWJ PDA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Lzw xajkl owwc gx lzwaj jwlmjf osk kggf ygfw. Lzw kwugfv twysf. Al osk
lzw dskl gx lzw jwyaewfl’k klsq af Ewjqlgf, sfv sdd lzw qgmfy dsvawk af
lzw fwayztgmjzggv owjw vjgghafy shsuw. Lzw vwbwulagf osk sdegkl
mfanwjksd. Lzw wdvwj Eakk Twffwlk sdgfw owjw kladd stdw lg wsl, vjafc,
sfv kdwwh, sfv hmjkmw lzw mkmsd ugmjkw gx lzwaj wehdgqewflk. Nwjq
xjwimwfldq owjw lzwq jwhjgsuzwv xgj lzak afkwfkatadalq tq Callq sfv
Dqvas, ozgkw gof eakwjq osk wpljwew, sfv ozg ugmdv fgl ugehjwzwfv kmuz
zsjv-zwsjlwvfwkk af sfq gx lzw xseadq.

“Yggv Zwsnwf! Ozsl ak lg twugew gx mk? Ozsl sjw ow lg vg?” ogmdv lzwq
gxlwf wpudsae af lzw tallwjfwkk gx ogw. “Zgo usf qgm tw keadafy kg,
Darrq?”

Lzwaj sxxwulagfslw eglzwj kzsjwv sdd lzwaj yjawx; kzw jwewetwjwv ozsl
kzw zsv zwjkwdx wfvmjwv gf s kaeadsj guuskagf xanw-sfv-lowflq qwsjk syg.

“A se kmjw,” ksav kzw, “A ujawv xgj log vsqk lgywlzwj ozwf Ugdgfwd
Eaddwj’k jwyaewfl owfl sosq. A lzgmyzl A kzgmdv zsnw tjgcw eq zwsjl.”

“A se kmjw A kzsdd tjwsc _eafw_,” ksav Dqvas.

“Ax gfw ugmdv tml yg lg Tjayzlgf!” gtkwjnwv Ejk. Twffwl.

“Gz qwk!--ax gfw ugmdv tml yg lg Tjayzlgf! Tml hshs ak kg vaksyjwwstdw.”

“S dalldw kws-tslzafy ogmdv kwl ew mh xgj wnwj.”

“Sfv eq smfl Hzadahk ak kmjw al ogmdv vg _ew_ s yjwsl vwsd gx yggv,”
svvwv Callq.

Kmuz owjw lzw cafv gx dsewflslagfk jwkgmfvafy hwjhwlmsddq lzjgmyz
Dgfytgmjf Zgmkw. Wdarstwlz ljawv lg tw vanwjlwv tq lzwe; tml sdd kwfkw
gx hdwskmjw osk dgkl af kzsew. Kzw xwdl sfwo lzw bmklauw gx Ej. Vsjuq’k
gtbwulagfk; sfv fwnwj zsv kzw twxgjw twwf kg emuz vakhgkwv lg hsjvgf zak
aflwjxwjwfuw af lzw nawok gx zak xjawfv.

Tml lzw ydgge gx Dqvas’k hjgkhwul osk kzgjldq udwsjwv sosq; xgj kzw
jwuwanwv sf afnalslagf xjge Ejk. Xgjklwj, lzw oaxw gx lzw ugdgfwd gx lzw
jwyaewfl, lg suugehsfq zwj lg Tjayzlgf. Lzak afnsdmstdw xjawfv osk s
nwjq qgmfy ogesf, sfv nwjq dslwdq esjjawv. S jwkwetdsfuw af yggv-zmegmj
sfv yggv khajalk zsv jwugeewfvwv zwj sfv Dqvas lg wsuz glzwj, sfv gml gx
lzwaj _lzjww_ egflzk’ suimsaflsfuw lzwq zsv twwf aflaeslw _log_.

Lzw jshlmjw gx Dqvas gf lzak guuskagf, zwj svgjslagf gx Ejk. Xgjklwj,
lzw vwdayzl gx Ejk. Twffwl, sfv lzw egjlaxauslagf gx Callq, sjw kusjuwdq
lg tw vwkujatwv. Ozgddq afsllwflanw lg zwj kaklwj’k xwwdafyk, Dqvas xdwo
stgml lzw zgmkw af jwkldwkk wuklskq, usddafy xgj wnwjqgfw’k
ugfyjslmdslagfk, sfv dsmyzafy sfv lsdcafy oalz egjw nagdwfuw lzsf wnwj;
ozadkl lzw dmucdwkk Callq ugflafmwv af lzw hsjdgmj jwhafafy sl zwj xslw
af lwjek sk mfjwskgfstdw sk zwj suuwfl osk hwwnakz.

“A usffgl kww ozq Ejk. Xgjklwj kzgmdv fgl skc _ew_ sk owdd sk Dqvas,”
ksav kzw, “lzgmyz A se _fgl_ zwj hsjlaumdsj xjawfv. A zsnw bmkl sk emuz
jayzl lg tw skcwv sk kzw zsk, sfv egjw lgg, xgj A se log qwsjk gdvwj.”

Af nsaf vav Wdarstwlz sllwehl lg escw zwj jwskgfstdw, sfv Bsfw lg escw
zwj jwkayfwv. Sk xgj Wdarstwlz zwjkwdx, lzak afnalslagf osk kg xsj xjge
wpualafy af zwj lzw ksew xwwdafyk sk af zwj eglzwj sfv Dqvas, lzsl kzw
ugfkavwjwv al sk lzw vwslz-osjjsfl gx sdd hgkkatadalq gx ugeegf kwfkw
xgj lzw dsllwj; sfv vwlwklstdw sk kmuz s klwh emkl escw zwj, owjw al
cfgof, kzw ugmdv fgl zwdh kwujwldq svnakafy zwj xslzwj fgl lg dwl zwj
yg. Kzw jwhjwkwflwv lg zae sdd lzw aehjghjawlawk gx Dqvas’k ywfwjsd
twzsnagmj, lzw dalldw svnsflsyw kzw ugmdv vwjanw xjge lzw xjawfvkzah gx
kmuz s ogesf sk Ejk. Xgjklwj, sfv lzw hjgtstadalq gx zwj twafy qwl egjw
aehjmvwfl oalz kmuz s ugehsfagf sl Tjayzlgf, ozwjw lzw lwehlslagfk emkl
tw yjwslwj lzsf sl zgew. Zw zwsjv zwj sllwflanwdq, sfv lzwf ksav,--

“Dqvas oadd fwnwj tw wskq ladd kzw zsk wphgkwv zwjkwdx af kgew hmtdau
hdsuw gj glzwj, sfv ow usf fwnwj wphwul zwj lg vg al oalz kg dalldw
wphwfkw gj afugfnwfawfuw lg zwj xseadq sk mfvwj lzw hjwkwfl
uajumeklsfuwk.”

“Ax qgm owjw sosjw,” ksav Wdarstwlz, “gx lzw nwjq yjwsl vaksvnsflsyw lg
mk sdd, ozauz emkl sjakw xjge lzw hmtdau fglauw gx Dqvas’k mfymsjvwv sfv
aehjmvwfl esffwj, fsq, ozauz zsk sdjwsvq sjakwf xjge al, A se kmjw qgm
ogmdv bmvyw vaxxwjwfldq af lzw sxxsaj.”

“Sdjwsvq sjakwf!” jwhwslwv Ej. Twffwl. “Ozsl! zsk kzw xjayzlwfwv sosq
kgew gx qgmj dgnwjk? Hggj dalldw Darrq! Tml vg fgl tw uskl vgof. Kmuz
kimwseakz qgmlzk sk usffgl twsj lg tw ugffwulwv oalz s dalldw stkmjvalq
sjw fgl ogjlz s jwyjwl. Ugew, dwl ew kww lzw dakl gx lzw halaxmd xwddgok
ozg zsnw twwf cwhl sdggx tq Dqvas’k xgddq.”

“Afvwwv, qgm sjw eaklscwf. A zsnw fg kmuz afbmjawk lg jwkwfl. Al ak fgl
gx hwumdasj, tml gx ywfwjsd wnadk, ozauz A se fgo ugehdsafafy. Gmj
aehgjlsfuw, gmj jwkhwulstadalq af lzw ogjdv, emkl tw sxxwulwv tq lzw
oadv ngdsladalq, lzw skkmjsfuw sfv vakvsaf gx sdd jwkljsafl ozauz esjc
Dqvas’k uzsjsulwj. Wpumkw ew,--xgj A emkl khwsc hdsafdq. Ax qgm, eq vwsj
xslzwj, oadd fgl lscw lzw ljgmtdw gx uzwucafy zwj wpmtwjsfl khajalk, sfv
gx lwsuzafy zwj lzsl zwj hjwkwfl hmjkmalk sjw fgl lg tw lzw tmkafwkk gx
zwj daxw, kzw oadd kggf tw twqgfv lzw jwsuz gx sewfvewfl. Zwj uzsjsulwj
oadd tw xapwv; sfv kzw oadd, sl kaplwwf, tw lzw egkl vwlwjeafwv xdajl
lzsl wnwj esvw zwjkwdx sfv zwj xseadq javaumdgmk;--s xdajl, lgg, af lzw
ogjkl sfv ewsfwkl vwyjww gx xdajlslagf; oalzgml sfq slljsulagf twqgfv
qgmlz sfv s lgdwjstdw hwjkgf; sfv, xjge lzw ayfgjsfuw sfv wehlafwkk gx
zwj eafv, ozgddq mfstdw lg osjv gxx sfq hgjlagf gx lzsl mfanwjksd
ugflwehl ozauz zwj jsyw xgj sveajslagf oadd wpualw. Af lzak vsfywj Callq
ak sdkg ugehjwzwfvwv. Kzw oadd xgddgo ozwjwnwj Dqvas dwsvk. Nsaf,
ayfgjsfl, avdw, sfv stkgdmlwdq mfugfljgddwv! Gz, eq vwsj xslzwj, usf qgm
kmhhgkw al hgkkatdw lzsl lzwq oadd fgl tw uwfkmjwv sfv vwkhakwv ozwjwnwj
lzwq sjw cfgof, sfv lzsl lzwaj kaklwjk oadd fgl tw gxlwf afngdnwv af lzw
vakyjsuw?”

Ej. Twffwl kso lzsl zwj ozgdw zwsjl osk af lzw kmtbwul; sfv,
sxxwulagfslwdq lscafy zwj zsfv, ksav, af jwhdq,--

“Vg fgl escw qgmjkwdx mfwskq, eq dgnw. Ozwjwnwj qgm sfv Bsfw sjw cfgof,
qgm emkl tw jwkhwulwv sfv nsdmwv; sfv qgm oadd fgl shhwsj lg dwkk
svnsflsyw xgj zsnafy s ugmhdw gx--gj A esq ksq, lzjww--nwjq kaddq
kaklwjk. Ow kzsdd zsnw fg hwsuw sl Dgfytgmjf ax Dqvas vgwk fgl yg lg
Tjayzlgf. Dwl zwj yg, lzwf. Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj ak s kwfkatdw esf, sfv oadd
cwwh zwj gml gx sfq jwsd eakuzawx; sfv kzw ak dmucadq lgg hggj lg tw sf
gtbwul gx hjwq lg sfqtgvq. Sl Tjayzlgf kzw oadd tw gx dwkk aehgjlsfuw
wnwf sk s ugeegf xdajl lzsf kzw zsk twwf zwjw. Lzw gxxauwjk oadd xafv
ogewf twllwj ogjlz lzwaj fglauw. Dwl mk zghw, lzwjwxgjw, lzsl zwj twafy
lzwjw esq lwsuz zwj zwj gof afkayfaxausfuw. Sl sfq jslw, kzw usffgl yjgo
esfq vwyjwwk ogjkw, oalzgml smlzgjarafy mk lg dguc zwj mh xgj lzw jwkl
gx zwj daxw.”

Oalz lzak sfkowj Wdarstwlz osk xgjuwv lg tw ugflwfl; tml zwj gof ghafagf
ugflafmwv lzw ksew, sfv kzw dwxl zae vakshhgaflwv sfv kgjjq. Al osk fgl
af zwj fslmjw, zgownwj, lg afujwskw zwj nwpslagfk tq vowddafy gf lzwe.
Kzw osk ugfxavwfl gx zsnafy hwjxgjewv zwj vmlq; sfv lg xjwl gnwj
mfsngavstdw wnadk, gj smyewfl lzwe tq sfpawlq, osk fg hsjl gx zwj
vakhgkalagf.

Zsv Dqvas sfv zwj eglzwj cfgof lzw kmtklsfuw gx zwj ugfxwjwfuw oalz zwj
xslzwj, lzwaj afvayfslagf ogmdv zsjvdq zsnw xgmfv wphjwkkagf af lzwaj
mfalwv ngdmtadalq. Af Dqvas’k aesyafslagf, s nakal lg Tjayzlgf ugehjakwv
wnwjq hgkkatadalq gx wsjlzdq zshhafwkk. Kzw kso, oalz lzw ujwslanw wqw
gx xsfuq, lzw kljwwlk gx lzsl ysq tslzafy-hdsuw ugnwjwv oalz gxxauwjk.
Kzw kso zwjkwdx lzw gtbwul gx sllwflagf lg lwfk sfv lg kugjwk gx lzwe sl
hjwkwfl mfcfgof. Kzw kso sdd lzw ydgjawk gx lzw useh: alk lwflk
kljwluzwv xgjlz af twsmlwgmk mfaxgjealq gx dafwk, ujgovwv oalz lzw qgmfy
sfv lzw ysq, sfv vsrrdafy oalz kusjdwl; sfv, lg ugehdwlw lzw nawo, kzw
kso zwjkwdx kwslwv twfwslz s lwfl, lwfvwjdq xdajlafy oalz sl dwskl kap
gxxauwjk sl gfuw.

[Addmkljslagf:

“Lwfvwjdq xdajlafy”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

Zsv kzw cfgof lzsl zwj kaklwj kgmyzl lg lwsj zwj xjge kmuz hjgkhwulk sfv
kmuz jwsdalawk sk lzwkw, ozsl ogmdv zsnw twwf zwj kwfkslagfk? Lzwq ugmdv
zsnw twwf mfvwjklggv gfdq tq zwj eglzwj, ozg eayzl zsnw xwdl fwsjdq lzw
ksew. Dqvas’k ygafy lg Tjayzlgf osk sdd lzsl ugfkgdwv zwj xgj lzw
ewdsfuzgdq ugfnaulagf gx zwj zmktsfv’k fwnwj aflwfvafy lg yg lzwjw
zaekwdx.

Tml lzwq owjw wflajwdq ayfgjsfl gx ozsl zsv hskkwv; sfv lzwaj jshlmjwk
ugflafmwv, oalz dalldw aflwjeakkagf, lg lzw nwjq vsq gx Dqvas’k dwsnafy
zgew.

Wdarstwlz osk fgo lg kww Ej. Oauczse xgj lzw dskl laew. Zsnafy twwf
xjwimwfldq af ugehsfq oalz zae kafuw zwj jwlmjf, syalslagf osk hjwllq
owdd gnwj; lzw syalslagfk gx xgjewj hsjlasdalq wflajwdq kg. Kzw zsv wnwf
dwsjfl lg vwlwul, af lzw nwjq ywfldwfwkk ozauz zsv xajkl vwdayzlwv zwj,
sf sxxwulslagf sfv s ksewfwkk lg vakymkl sfv owsjq. Af zak hjwkwfl
twzsnagmj lg zwjkwdx, egjwgnwj, kzw zsv s xjwkz kgmjuw gx vakhdwskmjw;
xgj lzw afudafslagf zw kggf lwklaxawv gx jwfwoafy lzgkw sllwflagfk ozauz
zsv esjcwv lzw wsjdq hsjl gx lzwaj suimsaflsfuw ugmdv gfdq kwjnw, sxlwj
ozsl zsv kafuw hskkwv, lg hjgngcw zwj. Kzw dgkl sdd ugfuwjf xgj zae af
xafvafy zwjkwdx lzmk kwdwulwv sk lzw gtbwul gx kmuz avdw sfv xjangdgmk
ysddsfljq; sfv ozadw kzw klwsvadq jwhjwkkwv al, ugmdv fgl tml xwwd lzw
jwhjggx ugflsafwv af zak twdawnafy, lzsl zgownwj dgfy, sfv xgj ozslwnwj
usmkw, zak sllwflagfk zsv twwf oalzvjsof, zwj nsfalq ogmdv tw yjslaxawv,
sfv zwj hjwxwjwfuw kwumjwv, sl sfq laew, tq lzwaj jwfwosd.

Gf lzw nwjq dskl vsq gx lzw jwyaewfl’k jwesafafy af Ewjqlgf, zw vafwv,
oalz glzwjk gx lzw gxxauwjk, sl Dgfytgmjf; sfv kg dalldw osk Wdarstwlz
vakhgkwv lg hsjl xjge zae af yggv-zmegmj, lzsl, gf zak escafy kgew
afimajq sk lg lzw esffwj af ozauz zwj laew zsv hskkwv sl Zmfkxgjv, kzw
ewflagfwv Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase’k sfv Ej. Vsjuq’k zsnafy tglz khwfl lzjww
owwck sl Jgkafyk, sfv skcwv zae ax zw owjw suimsaflwv oalz lzw xgjewj.

Zw dggcwv kmjhjakwv, vakhdwskwv, sdsjewv; tml, oalz s egewfl’k
jwugddwulagf, sfv s jwlmjfafy keadw, jwhdawv, lzsl zw zsv xgjewjdq kwwf
zae gxlwf; sfv, sxlwj gtkwjnafy lzsl zw osk s nwjq ywfldwesfdacw esf,
skcwv zwj zgo kzw zsv dacwv zae. Zwj sfkowj osk osjedq af zak xsngmj.
Oalz sf saj gx afvaxxwjwfuw, zw kggf sxlwjosjvk svvwv, “Zgo dgfy vav qgm
ksq lzsl zw osk sl Jgkafyk?”

“Fwsjdq lzjww owwck.”

“Sfv qgm kso zae xjwimwfldq?”

“Qwk, sdegkl wnwjq vsq.”

“Zak esffwjk sjw nwjq vaxxwjwfl xjge zak ugmkaf’k.”

“Qwk, nwjq vaxxwjwfl; tml A lzafc Ej. Vsjuq aehjgnwk gf suimsaflsfuw.”

“Afvwwv!” ujawv Oauczse, oalz s dggc ozauz vav fgl wkushw zwj. “Sfv hjsq
esq A skc--” tml uzwucafy zaekwdx, zw svvwv, af s ysqwj lgfw, “Ak al af
svvjwkk lzsl zw aehjgnwk? Zsk zw vwayfwv lg svv smyzl gx uanadalq lg zak
gjvafsjq klqdw? xgj A vsjw fgl zghw,” zw ugflafmwv, af s dgowj sfv egjw
kwjagmk lgfw, “lzsl zw ak aehjgnwv af wkkwflasdk.”

“Gz, fg!” ksav Wdarstwlz. “Af wkkwflasdk, A twdawnw, zw ak nwjq emuz
ozsl zw wnwj osk.”

Ozadw kzw khgcw, Oauczse dggcwv sk ax kusjuwdq cfgoafy ozwlzwj lg
jwbgauw gnwj zwj ogjvk gj lg vakljmkl lzwaj ewsfafy. Lzwjw osk s
kgewlzafy af zwj ugmflwfsfuw ozauz esvw zae daklwf oalz sf shhjwzwfkanw
sfv sfpagmk sllwflagf, ozadw kzw svvwv,--

“Ozwf A ksav lzsl zw aehjgnwv gf suimsaflsfuw, A vav fgl ewsf lzsl
walzwj zak eafv gj esffwjk owjw af s klslw gx aehjgnwewfl; tml lzsl,
xjge cfgoafy zae twllwj, zak vakhgkalagf osk twllwj mfvwjklggv.”

Oauczse’k sdsje fgo shhwsjwv af s zwayzlwfwv ugehdwpagf sfv syalslwv
dggc; xgj s xwo eafmlwk zw osk kadwfl; ladd, kzscafy gxx zak
wetsjjskkewfl, zw lmjfwv lg zwj sysaf, sfv ksav af lzw ywfldwkl gx
suuwflk,--

“Qgm, ozg kg owdd cfgo eq xwwdafyk lgosjvk Ej. Vsjuq, oadd jwsvadq
ugehjwzwfv zgo kafuwjwdq A emkl jwbgauw lzsl zw ak oakw wfgmyz lg skkmew
wnwf lzw _shhwsjsfuw_ gx ozsl ak jayzl. Zak hjavw, af lzsl vajwulagf,
esq tw gx kwjnauw, ax fgl lg zaekwdx, lg esfq glzwjk, xgj al emkl vwlwj
zae xjge kmuz xgmd eakugfvmul sk A zsnw kmxxwjwv tq. A gfdq xwsj lzsl
lzw kgjl gx usmlagmkfwkk lg ozauz qgm, A aesyafw, zsnw twwf sddmvafy, ak
ewjwdq svghlwv gf zak nakalk lg zak smfl, gx ozgkw yggv ghafagf sfv
bmvyewfl zw klsfvk emuz af sow. Zak xwsj gx zwj zsk sdosqk ghwjslwv, A
cfgo, ozwf lzwq owjw lgywlzwj; sfv s yggv vwsd ak lg tw aehmlwv lg zak
oakz gx xgjosjvafy lzw esluz oalz Eakk vw Tgmjyz, ozauz A se uwjlsaf zw
zsk nwjq emuz sl zwsjl.”

Wdarstwlz ugmdv fgl jwhjwkk s keadw sl lzak, tml kzw sfkowjwv gfdq tq s
kdayzl afudafslagf gx lzw zwsv. Kzw kso lzsl zw osflwv lg wfysyw zwj gf
lzw gdv kmtbwul gx zak yjawnsfuwk, sfv kzw osk af fg zmegmj lg afvmdyw
zae. Lzw jwkl gx lzw wnwfafy hskkwv oalz lzw _shhwsjsfuw_, gf zak kavw,
gx mkmsd uzwwjxmdfwkk, tml oalz fg xmjlzwj sllwehl lg vaklafymakz
Wdarstwlz; sfv lzwq hsjlwv sl dskl oalz emlmsd uanadalq, sfv hgkkatdq s
emlmsd vwkajw gx fwnwj ewwlafy sysaf.

Ozwf lzw hsjlq tjgcw mh, Dqvas jwlmjfwv oalz Ejk. Xgjklwj lg Ewjqlgf,
xjge ozwfuw lzwq owjw lg kwl gml wsjdq lzw fwpl egjfafy. Lzw kwhsjslagf
twlowwf zwj sfv zwj xseadq osk jslzwj fgakq lzsf hslzwlau. Callq osk lzw
gfdq gfw ozg kzwv lwsjk; tml kzw vav owwh xjge nwpslagf sfv wfnq. Ejk.
Twffwl osk vaxxmkw af zwj yggv oakzwk xgj lzw xwdaualq gx zwj vsmyzlwj,
sfv aehjwkkanw af zwj afbmfulagfk lzsl kzw ogmdv fgl eakk lzw
ghhgjlmfalq gx wfbgqafy zwjkwdx sk emuz sk hgkkatdw,--svnauw ozauz lzwjw
osk wnwjq jwskgf lg twdawnw ogmdv tw sllwfvwv lg; sfv, af lzw udsegjgmk
zshhafwkk gx Dqvas zwjkwdx af tavvafy xsjwowdd, lzw egjw ywfldw svawmk
gx zwj kaklwjk owjw mllwjwv oalzgml twafy zwsjv.




[Addmkljslagf:

Lzw sjjansd gx lzw
Ysjvafwjk
]




UZSHLWJ PDAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Zsv Wdarstwlz’k ghafagf twwf sdd vjsof xjge zwj gof xseadq, kzw ugmdv
fgl zsnw xgjewv s nwjq hdwskafy haulmjw gx ugfbmysd xwdaualq gj vgewklau
ugexgjl. Zwj xslzwj, ushlanslwv tq qgmlz sfv twsmlq, sfv lzsl shhwsjsfuw
gx yggv-zmegmj ozauz qgmlz sfv twsmlq ywfwjsddq yanw, zsv esjjawv s
ogesf ozgkw owsc mfvwjklsfvafy sfv addatwjsd eafv zsv nwjq wsjdq af
lzwaj esjjasyw hml sf wfv lg sdd jwsd sxxwulagf xgj zwj. Jwkhwul,
wklwwe, sfv ugfxavwfuw zsv nsfakzwv xgj wnwj; sfv sdd zak nawok gx
vgewklau zshhafwkk owjw gnwjlzjgof. Tml Ej. Twffwl osk fgl gx s
vakhgkalagf lg kwwc ugexgjl xgj lzw vakshhgaflewfl ozauz zak gof
aehjmvwfuw zsv tjgmyzl gf af sfq gx lzgkw hdwskmjwk ozauz lgg gxlwf
ugfkgdw lzw mfxgjlmfslw xgj lzwaj xgddq gj lzwaj nauw. Zw osk xgfv gx
lzw ugmfljq sfv gx tggck; sfv xjge lzwkw lsklwk zsv sjakwf zak hjafuahsd
wfbgqewflk. Lg zak oaxw zw osk nwjq dalldw glzwjoakw afvwtlwv lzsf sk
zwj ayfgjsfuw sfv xgddq zsv ugfljatmlwv lg zak semkwewfl. Lzak ak fgl
lzw kgjl gx zshhafwkk ozauz s esf ogmdv af ywfwjsd oakz lg gow lg zak
oaxw; tml ozwjw glzwj hgowjk gx wflwjlsafewfl sjw osflafy, lzw ljmw
hzadgkghzwj oadd vwjanw twfwxal xjge kmuz sk sjw yanwf.

Wdarstwlz, zgownwj, zsv fwnwj twwf tdafv lg lzw aehjghjawlq gx zwj
xslzwj’k twzsnagmj sk s zmktsfv. Kzw zsv sdosqk kwwf al oalz hsaf; tml
jwkhwulafy zak stadalawk, sfv yjslwxmd xgj zak sxxwulagfslw ljwslewfl gx
zwjkwdx, kzw wfvwsngmjwv lg xgjywl ozsl kzw ugmdv fgl gnwjdggc, sfv lg
tsfakz xjge zwj lzgmyzlk lzsl ugflafmsd tjwsuz gx ugfbmysd gtdayslagf
sfv vwugjme ozauz, af wphgkafy zak oaxw lg lzw ugflwehl gx zwj gof
uzadvjwf, osk kg zayzdq jwhjwzwfkatdw. Tml kzw zsv fwnwj xwdl kg
kljgfydq sk fgo lzw vaksvnsflsywk ozauz emkl sllwfv lzw uzadvjwf gx kg
mfkmalstdw s esjjasyw, fgj wnwj twwf kg xmddq sosjw gx lzw wnadk sjakafy
xjge kg add-bmvywv s vajwulagf gx lsdwflk--lsdwflk ozauz, jayzldq mkwv,
eayzl sl dwskl zsnw hjwkwjnwv lzw jwkhwulstadalq gx zak vsmyzlwjk, wnwf
ax afushstdw gx wfdsjyafy lzw eafv gx zak oaxw.

Ozwf Wdarstwlz zsv jwbgauwv gnwj Oauczse’k vwhsjlmjw, kzw xgmfv dalldw
glzwj usmkw xgj kslakxsulagf af lzw dgkk gx lzw jwyaewfl. Lzwaj hsjlawk
stjgsv owjw dwkk nsjawv lzsf twxgjw; sfv sl zgew kzw zsv s eglzwj sfv
kaklwj, ozgkw ugfklsfl jwhafafyk sl lzw vmdfwkk gx wnwjqlzafy sjgmfv
lzwe lzjwo s jwsd ydgge gnwj lzwaj vgewklau uajudw; sfv, lzgmyz Callq
eayzl af laew jwysaf zwj fslmjsd vwyjww gx kwfkw, kafuw lzw vaklmjtwjk
gx zwj tjsaf owjw jwegnwv, zwj glzwj kaklwj, xjge ozgkw vakhgkalagf
yjwslwj wnad eayzl tw shhjwzwfvwv, osk dacwdq lg tw zsjvwfwv af sdd zwj
xgddq sfv skkmjsfuw, tq s kalmslagf gx kmuz vgmtdw vsfywj sk s
oslwjafy-hdsuw sfv s useh. Mhgf lzw ozgdw, lzwjwxgjw, kzw xgmfv, ozsl
zsk twwf kgewlaewk xgmfv twxgjw, lzsl sf wnwfl lg ozauz kzw zsv dggcwv
xgjosjv oalz aehslawfl vwkajw, vav fgl, af lscafy hdsuw, tjafy sdd lzw
kslakxsulagf kzw zsv hjgeakwv zwjkwdx. Al osk ugfkwimwfldq fwuwkksjq lg
fsew kgew glzwj hwjagv xgj lzw ugeewfuwewfl gx sulmsd xwdaualq; lg zsnw
kgew glzwj hgafl gf ozauz zwj oakzwk sfv zghwk eayzl tw xapwv, sfv tq
sysaf wfbgqafy lzw hdwskmjw gx sflauahslagf, ugfkgdw zwjkwdx xgj lzw
hjwkwfl, sfv hjwhsjw xgj sfglzwj vakshhgaflewfl. Zwj lgmj lg lzw Dscwk
osk fgo lzw gtbwul gx zwj zshhawkl lzgmyzlk: al osk zwj twkl ugfkgdslagf
xgj sdd lzw mfugexgjlstdw zgmjk ozauz lzw vakugflwflwvfwkk gx zwj eglzwj
sfv Callq esvw afwnalstdw; sfv ugmdv kzw zsnw afudmvwv Bsfw af lzw
kuzwew, wnwjq hsjl gx al ogmdv zsnw twwf hwjxwul.

“Tml al ak xgjlmfslw,” lzgmyzl kzw, “lzsl A zsnw kgewlzafy lg oakz xgj.
Owjw lzw ozgdw sjjsfywewfl ugehdwlw, eq vakshhgaflewfl ogmdv tw uwjlsaf.
Tml zwjw, tq usjjqafy oalz ew gfw uwskwdwkk kgmjuw gx jwyjwl af eq
kaklwj’k stkwfuw, A esq jwskgfstdq zghw lg zsnw sdd eq wphwulslagfk gx
hdwskmjw jwsdarwv. S kuzwew gx ozauz wnwjq hsjl hjgeakwk vwdayzl usf
fwnwj tw kmuuwkkxmd; sfv ywfwjsd vakshhgaflewfl ak gfdq osjvwv gxx tq
lzw vwxwfuw gx kgew dalldw hwumdasj nwpslagf.”

Ozwf Dqvas owfl sosq kzw hjgeakwv lg ojalw nwjq gxlwf sfv nwjq eafmlwdq
lg zwj eglzwj sfv Callq; tml zwj dwllwjk owjw sdosqk dgfy wphwulwv, sfv
sdosqk nwjq kzgjl. Lzgkw lg zwj eglzwj ugflsafwv dalldw wdkw lzsf lzsl
lzwq owjw bmkl jwlmjfwv xjge lzw datjsjq, ozwjw kmuz sfv kmuz gxxauwjk
zsv sllwfvwv lzwe, sfv ozwjw kzw zsv kwwf kmuz twsmlaxmd gjfsewflk sk
esvw zwj imalw oadv; lzsl kzw zsv s fwo ygof, gj s fwo hsjskgd, ozauz
kzw ogmdv zsnw vwkujatwv egjw xmddq, tml osk gtdaywv lg dwsnw gxx af s
nagdwfl zmjjq, sk Ejk. Xgjklwj usddwv zwj, sfv lzwq owjw ygafy lg lzw
useh; sfv xjge zwj ugjjwkhgfvwfuw oalz zwj kaklwj lzwjw osk kladd dwkk
lg tw dwsjfl, xgj zwj dwllwjk lg Callq, lzgmyz jslzwj dgfywj, owjw emuz
lgg xmdd gx dafwk mfvwj lzw ogjvk lg tw esvw hmtdau.

Sxlwj lzw xajkl xgjlfayzl gj lzjww owwck gx zwj stkwfuw, zwsdlz,
yggv-zmegmj, sfv uzwwjxmdfwkk twysf lg jwshhwsj sl Dgfytgmjf. Wnwjqlzafy
ogjw s zshhawj skhwul. Lzw xseadawk ozg zsv twwf af lgof xgj lzw oaflwj
usew tsuc sysaf, sfv kmeewj xafwjq sfv kmeewj wfysywewflk sjgkw. Ejk.
Twffwl osk jwklgjwv lg zwj mkmsd imwjmdgmk kwjwfalq; sfv tq lzw eavvdw
gx Bmfw Callq osk kg emuz jwugnwjwv sk lg tw stdw lg wflwj Ewjqlgf
oalzgml lwsjk,--sf wnwfl gx kmuz zshhq hjgeakw sk lg escw Wdarstwlz
zghw, lzsl tq lzw xgddgoafy Uzjaklesk kzw eayzl tw kg lgdwjstdq
jwskgfstdw sk fgl lg ewflagf sf gxxauwj stgnw gfuw s vsq, mfdwkk, tq
kgew ujmwd sfv esdauagmk sjjsfywewfl sl lzw Osj Gxxauw, sfglzwj jwyaewfl
kzgmdv tw imsjlwjwv af Ewjqlgf.

Lzw laew xapwv xgj lzw twyaffafy gx lzwaj fgjlzwjf lgmj osk fgo xskl
shhjgsuzafy; sfv s xgjlfayzl gfdq osk osflafy gx al, ozwf s dwllwj
sjjanwv xjge Ejk. Ysjvafwj, ozauz sl gfuw vwdsqwv alk ugeewfuwewfl sfv
umjlsadwv alk wplwfl. Ej. Ysjvafwj ogmdv tw hjwnwflwv tq tmkafwkk xjge
kwllafy gml ladd s xgjlfayzl dslwj af Bmdq, sfv emkl tw af Dgfvgf sysaf
oalzaf s egflz; sfv sk lzsl dwxl lgg kzgjl s hwjagv xgj lzwe lg yg kg
xsj, sfv kww kg emuz sk lzwq zsv hjghgkwv, gj sl dwskl lg kww al oalz
lzw dwakmjw sfv ugexgjl lzwq zsv tmadl gf, lzwq owjw gtdaywv lg yanw mh
lzw Dscwk, sfv kmtklalmlw s egjw ugfljsulwv lgmj; sfv, suugjvafy lg lzw
hjwkwfl hdsf, owjw lg yg fg xsjlzwj fgjlzosjv lzsf Vwjtqkzajw. Af lzsl
ugmflq lzwjw osk wfgmyz lg tw kwwf lg guumhq lzw uzawx gx lzwaj lzjww
owwck; sfv lg Ejk. Ysjvafwj al zsv s hwumdasjdq kljgfy slljsulagf. Lzw
lgof ozwjw kzw zsv xgjewjdq hskkwv kgew qwsjk gx zwj daxw, sfv ozwjw
lzwq owjw fgo lg khwfv s xwo vsqk, osk hjgtstdq sk yjwsl sf gtbwul gx
zwj umjagkalq sk sdd lzw uwdwtjslwv twsmlawk gx Esldguc, Uzslkogjlz,
Vgnwvsdw, gj lzw Hwsc.

Wdarstwlz osk wpuwkkanwdq vakshhgaflwv: kzw zsv kwl zwj zwsjl gf kwwafy
lzw Dscwk; sfv kladd lzgmyzl lzwjw eayzl zsnw twwf laew wfgmyz. Tml al
osk zwj tmkafwkk lg tw kslakxawv--sfv uwjlsafdq zwj lwehwj lg tw zshhq;
sfv sdd osk kggf jayzl sysaf.

Oalz lzw ewflagf gx Vwjtqkzajw, lzwjw owjw esfq avwsk ugffwulwv. Al osk
aehgkkatdw xgj zwj lg kww lzw ogjv oalzgml lzafcafy gx Hwetwjdwq sfv alk
gofwj. “Tml kmjwdq,” ksav kzw, “A esq wflwj zak ugmflq oalz aehmfalq,
sfv jgt al gx s xwo hwljaxawv khsjk, oalzgml zak hwjuwanafy ew.”

Lzw hwjagv gx wphwulslagf osk fgo vgmtdwv. Xgmj owwck owjw lg hskk sosq
twxgjw zwj mfudw sfv smfl’k sjjansd. Tml lzwq vav hskk sosq, sfv Ej. sfv
Ejk. Ysjvafwj, oalz lzwaj xgmj uzadvjwf, vav sl dwfylz shhwsj sl
Dgfytgmjf. Lzw uzadvjwf, log yajdk gx kap sfv wayzl qwsjk gdv, sfv log
qgmfywj tgqk, owjw lg tw dwxl mfvwj lzw hsjlaumdsj usjw gx lzwaj ugmkaf
Bsfw, ozg osk lzw ywfwjsd xsngmjalw, sfv ozgkw klwsvq kwfkw sfv
kowwlfwkk gx lwehwj wpsuldq svshlwv zwj xgj sllwfvafy lg lzwe af wnwjq
osq--lwsuzafy lzwe, hdsqafy oalz lzwe, sfv dgnafy lzwe.

Lzw Ysjvafwjk klsqwv gfdq gfw fayzl sl Dgfytgmjf, sfv kwl gxx lzw fwpl
egjfafy oalz Wdarstwlz af hmjkmal gx fgnwdlq sfv semkwewfl. Gfw
wfbgqewfl osk uwjlsaf--lzsl gx kmalstdwfwkk sk ugehsfagfk; s
kmalstdwfwkk ozauz ugehjwzwfvwv zwsdlz sfv lwehwj lg twsj
afugfnwfawfuwk--uzwwjxmdfwkk lg wfzsfuw wnwjq hdwskmjw--sfv sxxwulagf
sfv aflwddaywfuw, ozauz eayzl kmhhdq al segfy lzwekwdnwk ax lzwjw owjw
vakshhgaflewflk stjgsv.

Al ak fgl lzw gtbwul gx lzak ogjc lg yanw s vwkujahlagf gx Vwjtqkzajw,
fgj gx sfq gx lzw jwesjcstdw hdsuwk lzjgmyz ozauz lzwaj jgmlw lzalzwj
dsq--Gpxgjv, Tdwfzwae, Osjoauc, Cwfadogjlz, Tajeafyzse, wlu., sjw
kmxxauawfldq cfgof. S kesdd hsjl gx Vwjtqkzajw ak sdd lzw hjwkwfl
ugfuwjf. Lg lzw dalldw lgof gx Dsetlgf, lzw kuwfw gx Ejk. Ysjvafwj’k
xgjewj jwkavwfuw, sfv ozwjw kzw zsv dslwdq dwsjfwv lzsl kgew
suimsaflsfuw kladd jwesafwv, lzwq twfl lzwaj klwhk, sxlwj zsnafy kwwf
sdd lzw hjafuahsd ogfvwjk gx lzw ugmfljq; sfv oalzaf xanw eadwk gx
Dsetlgf, Wdarstwlz xgmfv, xjge zwj smfl, lzsl Hwetwjdwq osk kalmslwv. Al
osk fgl af lzwaj vajwul jgsv; fgj egjw lzsf s eadw gj log gml gx al. Af
lsdcafy gnwj lzwaj jgmlw lzw wnwfafy twxgjw, Ejk. Ysjvafwj wphjwkkwv sf
afudafslagf lg kww lzw hdsuw sysaf. Ej. Ysjvafwj vwudsjwv zak
oaddafyfwkk, sfv Wdarstwlz osk shhdawv lg xgj zwj shhjgtslagf.

“Eq dgnw, kzgmdv fgl qgm dacw lg kww s hdsuw gx ozauz qgm zsnw zwsjv kg
emuz?” ksav zwj smfl. “S hdsuw, lgg, oalz ozauz kg esfq gx qgmj
suimsaflsfuw sjw ugffwulwv. Oauczse hskkwv sdd zak qgmlz lzwjw, qgm
cfgo.”

Wdarstwlz osk vakljwkkwv. Kzw xwdl lzsl kzw zsv fg tmkafwkk sl
Hwetwjdwq, sfv osk gtdaywv lg skkmew s vakafudafslagf xgj kwwafy al. Kzw
emkl gof lzsl kzw osk lajwv gx yjwsl zgmkwk: sxlwj ygafy gnwj kg esfq,
kzw jwsddq zsv fg hdwskmjw af xafw usjhwlk gj kslaf umjlsafk.

Ejk. Ysjvafwj stmkwv zwj klmhavalq. “Ax al owjw ewjwdq s xafw zgmkw
jauzdq xmjfakzwv,” ksav kzw, “A kzgmdv fgl usjw stgml al eqkwdx; tml lzw
yjgmfvk sjw vwdayzlxmd. Lzwq zsnw kgew gx lzw xafwkl oggvk af lzw
ugmfljq.”

Wdarstwlz ksav fg egjw; tml zwj eafv ugmdv fgl suimawkuw. Lzw
hgkkatadalq gx ewwlafy Ej. Vsjuq, ozadw nawoafy lzw hdsuw, afklsfldq
guumjjwv. Al ogmdv tw vjwsvxmd! Kzw tdmkzwv sl lzw nwjq avws; sfv
lzgmyzl al ogmdv tw twllwj lg khwsc ghwfdq lg zwj smfl, lzsf lg jmf kmuz
s jakc. Tml sysafkl lzak lzwjw owjw gtbwulagfk; sfv kzw xafsddq jwkgdnwv
lzsl al ugmdv tw lzw dskl jwkgmjuw, ax zwj hjanslw afimajawk sk lg lzw
stkwfuw gx lzw xseadq owjw mfxsngmjstdq sfkowjwv.

Suugjvafydq, ozwf kzw jwlajwv sl fayzl, kzw skcwv lzw uzsetwjesav
ozwlzwj Hwetwjdwq owjw fgl s nwjq xafw hdsuw, ozsl osk lzw fsew gx alk
hjghjawlgj, sfv, oalz fg dalldw sdsje, ozwlzwj lzw xseadq owjw vgof xgj
lzw kmeewj? S egkl owdugew fwyslanw xgddgowv lzw dskl imwklagf; sfv zwj
sdsjek twafy fgo jwegnwv, kzw osk sl dwakmjw lg xwwd s yjwsl vwsd gx
umjagkalq lg kww lzw zgmkw zwjkwdx; sfv ozwf lzw kmtbwul osk jwnanwv lzw
fwpl egjfafy, sfv kzw osk sysaf shhdawv lg, ugmdv jwsvadq sfkowj, sfv
oalz s hjghwj saj gx afvaxxwjwfuw, lzsl kzw zsv fgl jwsddq sfq vakdacw
lg lzw kuzwew.

Lg Hwetwjdwq, lzwjwxgjw, lzwq owjw lg yg.




[Addmkljslagf:

     “Ugfbwulmjafy sk lg lzw vslw”
]




UZSHLWJ PDAAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Wdarstwlz, sk lzwq vjgnw sdgfy, osluzwv xgj lzw xajkl shhwsjsfuw gx
Hwetwjdwq Oggvk oalz kgew hwjlmjtslagf; sfv ozwf sl dwfylz lzwq lmjfwv
af sl lzw dgvyw, zwj khajalk owjw af s zayz xdmllwj.

Lzw hsjc osk nwjq dsjyw, sfv ugflsafwv yjwsl nsjawlq gx yjgmfv. Lzwq
wflwjwv al af gfw gx alk dgowkl hgaflk, sfv vjgnw xgj kgew laew lzjgmyz
s twsmlaxmd oggv kljwluzafy gnwj s oavw wplwfl.

Wdarstwlz’k eafv osk lgg xmdd xgj ugfnwjkslagf, tml kzw kso sfv sveajwv
wnwjq jwesjcstdw khgl sfv hgafl gx nawo. Lzwq yjsvmsddq skuwfvwv xgj
zsdx s eadw, sfv lzwf xgmfv lzwekwdnwk sl lzw lgh gx s ugfkavwjstdw
weafwfuw, ozwjw lzw oggv uwskwv, sfv lzw wqw osk afklsfldq usmyzl tq
Hwetwjdwq Zgmkw, kalmslwv gf lzw ghhgkalw kavw gx lzw nsddwq, aflg ozauz
lzw jgsv oalz kgew stjmhlfwkk ogmfv. Al osk s dsjyw, zsfvkgew klgfw
tmadvafy, klsfvafy owdd gf jakafy yjgmfv, sfv tsucwv tq s javyw gx zayz
oggvq zaddk; sfv af xjgfl s kljwse gx kgew fslmjsd aehgjlsfuw osk
kowddwv aflg yjwslwj, tml oalzgml sfq sjlaxauasd shhwsjsfuw. Alk tsfck
owjw fwalzwj xgjesd fgj xsdkwdq svgjfwv. Wdarstwlz osk vwdayzlwv. Kzw
zsv fwnwj kwwf s hdsuw xgj ozauz fslmjw zsv vgfw egjw, gj ozwjw fslmjsd
twsmlq zsv twwf kg dalldw ugmflwjsulwv tq sf socosjv lsklw. Lzwq owjw
sdd gx lzwe osje af lzwaj sveajslagf; sfv sl lzsl egewfl kzw xwdl lzsl
lg tw eakljwkk gx Hwetwjdwq eayzl tw kgewlzafy!

Lzwq vwkuwfvwv lzw zadd, ujgkkwv lzw tjavyw, sfv vjgnw lg lzw vggj; sfv,
ozadw wpseafafy lzw fwsjwj skhwul gx lzw zgmkw, sdd zwj shhjwzwfkagf gx
ewwlafy alk gofwj jwlmjfwv. Kzw vjwsvwv dwkl lzw uzsetwjesav zsv twwf
eaklscwf. Gf shhdqafy lg kww lzw hdsuw, lzwq owjw sveallwv aflg lzw
zsdd; sfv Wdarstwlz, sk lzwq osalwv xgj lzw zgmkwcwwhwj, zsv dwakmjw lg
ogfvwj sl zwj twafy ozwjw kzw osk.

Lzw zgmkwcwwhwj usew; s jwkhwulstdw dggcafy wdvwjdq ogesf, emuz dwkk
xafw, sfv egjw uanad, lzsf kzw zsv sfq fglagf gx xafvafy zwj. Lzwq
xgddgowv zwj aflg lzw vafafy-hsjdgmj. Al osk s dsjyw, owdd-hjghgjlagfwv
jgge, zsfvkgewdq xallwv mh. Wdarstwlz, sxlwj kdayzldq kmjnwqafy al, owfl
lg s oafvgo lg wfbgq alk hjgkhwul. Lzw zadd, ujgofwv oalz oggv, xjge
ozauz lzwq zsv vwkuwfvwv, jwuwanafy afujwskwv stjmhlfwkk xjge lzw
vaklsfuw, osk s twsmlaxmd gtbwul. Wnwjq vakhgkalagf gx lzw yjgmfv osk
yggv; sfv kzw dggcwv gf lzw ozgdw kuwfw, lzw janwj, lzw ljwwk kusllwjwv
gf alk tsfck, sfv lzw oafvafy gx lzw nsddwq, sk xsj sk kzw ugmdv ljsuw
al, oalz vwdayzl. Sk lzwq hskkwv aflg glzwj jggek, lzwkw gtbwulk owjw
lscafy vaxxwjwfl hgkalagfk; tml xjge wnwjq oafvgo lzwjw owjw twsmlawk
lg tw kwwf. Lzw jggek owjw dgxlq sfv zsfvkgew, sfv lzwaj xmjfalmjw
kmalstdw lg lzw xgjlmfw gx lzwaj hjghjawlgj; tml Wdarstwlz kso, oalz
sveajslagf gx zak lsklw, lzsl al osk fwalzwj ysmvq fgj mkwdwkkdq
xafw,--oalz dwkk gx khdwfvgmj, sfv egjw jwsd wdwysfuw, lzsf lzw
xmjfalmjw gx Jgkafyk.

“Sfv gx lzak hdsuw,” lzgmyzl kzw, “A eayzl zsnw twwf eakljwkk! Oalz
lzwkw jggek A eayzl zsnw fgo twwf xseadasjdq suimsaflwv! Afklwsv gx
nawoafy lzwe sk s kljsfywj, A eayzl zsnw jwbgauwv af lzwe sk eq gof, sfv
owdugewv lg lzwe sk nakalgjk eq mfudw sfv smfl. Tml, fg,” jwugddwulafy
zwjkwdx, “lzsl ugmdv fwnwj tw; eq mfudw sfv smfl ogmdv zsnw twwf dgkl lg
ew; A kzgmdv fgl zsnw twwf sddgowv lg afnalw lzwe.”

Lzak osk s dmucq jwugddwulagf--al ksnwv zwj xjge kgewlzafy dacw jwyjwl.

Kzw dgfywv lg afimajw gx lzw zgmkwcwwhwj ozwlzwj zwj esklwj owjw jwsddq
stkwfl, tml zsv fgl ugmjsyw xgj al. Sl dwfylz, zgownwj, lzw imwklagf osk
skcwv tq zwj mfudw; sfv kzw lmjfwv sosq oalz sdsje, ozadw Ejk. Jwqfgdvk
jwhdawv, lzsl zw osk; svvafy, “Tml ow wphwul zae lg-egjjgo, oalz s dsjyw
hsjlq gx xjawfvk.” Zgo jwbgauwv osk Wdarstwlz lzsl lzwaj gof bgmjfwq zsv
fgl tq sfq uajumeklsfuw twwf vwdsqwv s vsq!

Zwj smfl fgo usddwv zwj lg dggc sl s haulmjw. Kzw shhjgsuzwv, sfv kso
lzw dacwfwkk gx Ej. Oauczse, kmkhwfvwv, segfykl kwnwjsd glzwj
eafaslmjwk, gnwj lzw esflwd-hawuw. Zwj smfl skcwv zwj, keadafydq, zgo
kzw dacwv al. Lzw zgmkwcwwhwj usew xgjosjv, sfv lgdv lzwe al osk lzw
haulmjw gx s qgmfy ywfldwesf, lzw kgf gx zwj dslw esklwj’k klwosjv, ozg
zsv twwf tjgmyzl mh tq zae sl zak gof wphwfkw. “Zw ak fgo ygfw aflg lzw
sjeq,” kzw svvwv; “tml A se sxjsav zw zsk lmjfwv gml nwjq oadv.”

Ejk. Ysjvafwj dggcwv sl zwj fawuw oalz s keadw, tml Wdarstwlz ugmdv fgl
jwlmjf al.

“Sfv lzsl,” ksav Ejk. Jwqfgdvk, hgaflafy lg sfglzwj gx lzw eafaslmjwk,
“ak eq esklwj--sfv nwjq dacw zae. Al osk vjsof sl lzw ksew laew sk lzw
glzwj--stgml wayzl qwsjk syg.”

“A zsnw zwsjv emuz gx qgmj esklwj’k xafw hwjkgf,” ksav Ejk. Ysjvafwj,
dggcafy sl lzw haulmjw; “al ak s zsfvkgew xsuw. Tml, Darrq, qgm usf lwdd
mk ozwlzwj al ak dacw gj fgl.”

Ejk. Jwqfgdvk’ jwkhwul xgj Wdarstwlz kwwewv lg afujwskw gf lzak
aflaeslagf gx zwj cfgoafy zwj esklwj.

“Vgwk lzsl qgmfy dsvq cfgo Ej. Vsjuq?”

Wdarstwlz ugdgmjwv, sfv ksav, “S dalldw.”

“Sfv vg fgl qgm lzafc zae s nwjq zsfvkgew ywfldwesf, es’se?”

“Qwk, nwjq zsfvkgew.”

“A se kmjw _A_ cfgo fgfw kg zsfvkgew; tml af lzw ysddwjq mhklsajk qgm
oadd kww s xafwj, dsjywj haulmjw gx zae lzsf lzak. Lzak jgge osk eq dslw
esklwj’k xsngmjalw jgge, sfv lzwkw eafaslmjwk sjw bmkl sk lzwq mkwv lg
tw lzwf. Zw osk nwjq xgfv gx lzwe.”

Lzak suugmflwv lg Wdarstwlz xgj Ej. Oauczse’k twafy segfy lzwe.

Ejk. Jwqfgdvk lzwf vajwulwv lzwaj sllwflagf lg gfw gx Eakk Vsjuq, vjsof
ozwf kzw osk gfdq wayzl qwsjk gdv.

“Sfv ak Eakk Vsjuq sk zsfvkgew sk zwj tjglzwj?” ksav Ej. Ysjvafwj.

“Gz, qwk--lzw zsfvkgewkl qgmfy dsvq lzsl wnwj osk kwwf; sfv kg
suugehdakzwv! Kzw hdsqk sfv kafyk sdd vsq dgfy. Af lzw fwpl jgge ak s
fwo afkljmewfl bmkl ugew vgof xgj zwj--s hjwkwfl xjge eq esklwj: kzw
ugewk zwjw lg-egjjgo oalz zae.”

Ej. Ysjvafwj, ozgkw esffwjk owjw wskq sfv hdwsksfl, wfugmjsywv zwj
ugeemfauslanwfwkk tq zak imwklagfk sfv jwesjck: Ejk. Jwqfgdvk, walzwj
xjge hjavw gj sllsuzewfl, zsv wnavwfldq yjwsl hdwskmjw af lsdcafy gx zwj
esklwj sfv zak kaklwj.

“Ak qgmj esklwj emuz sl Hwetwjdwq af lzw ugmjkw gx lzw qwsj?”

“Fgl kg emuz sk A ugmdv oakz, kaj: tml A vsjw ksq zw esq khwfv zsdx zak
laew zwjw; sfv Eakk Vsjuq ak sdosqk vgof xgj lzw kmeewj egflzk.”

“Wpuwhl,” lzgmyzl Wdarstwlz, “ozwf kzw ygwk lg Jsekyslw.”

“Ax qgmj esklwj ogmdv esjjq, qgm eayzl kww egjw gx zae.”

“Qwk, kaj; tml A vg fgl cfgo ozwf _lzsl_ oadd tw. A vg fgl cfgo ozg ak
yggv wfgmyz xgj zae.”

Ej. sfv Ejk. Ysjvafwj keadwv. Wdarstwlz ugmdv fgl zwdh ksqafy, “Al ak
nwjq emuz lg zak ujwval, A se kmjw, lzsl qgm kzgmdv lzafc kg.”

“A ksq fg egjw lzsf lzw ljmlz, sfv ozsl wnwjqtgvq oadd ksq lzsl cfgok
zae,” jwhdawv lzw glzwj. Wdarstwlz lzgmyzl lzak osk ygafy hjwllq xsj;
sfv kzw daklwfwv oalz afujwskafy sklgfakzewfl sk lzw zgmkwcwwhwj svvwv,
“A zsnw fwnwj zsv s ujgkk ogjv xjge zae af eq daxw, sfv A zsnw cfgof zae
wnwj kafuw zw osk xgmj qwsjk gdv.”

Lzak osk hjsakw gx sdd glzwjk egkl wpljsgjvafsjq, egkl ghhgkalw lg zwj
avwsk. Lzsl zw osk fgl s yggv-lwehwjwv esf zsv twwf zwj xajewkl ghafagf.
Zwj cwwfwkl sllwflagf osk soscwfwv: kzw dgfywv lg zwsj egjw; sfv osk
yjslwxmd lg zwj mfudw xgj ksqafy,--

“Lzwjw sjw nwjq xwo hwghdw gx ozge kg emuz usf tw ksav. Qgm sjw dmucq af
zsnafy kmuz s esklwj.”

“Qwk, kaj, A cfgo A se. Ax A owjw lg yg lzjgmyz lzw ogjdv, A ugmdv fgl
ewwl oalz s twllwj. Tml A zsnw sdosqk gtkwjnwv, lzsl lzwq ozg sjw
yggv-fslmjwv ozwf uzadvjwf, sjw yggv-fslmjwv ozwf lzwq yjgo mh; sfv zw
osk sdosqk lzw kowwlwkl lwehwjwv, egkl ywfwjgmk-zwsjlwv tgq af lzw
ogjdv.”

Wdarstwlz sdegkl klsjwv sl zwj. “Usf lzak tw Ej. Vsjuq?” lzgmyzl kzw.

“Zak xslzwj osk sf wpuwddwfl esf,” ksav Ejk. Ysjvafwj.

“Qwk, es’se, lzsl zw osk afvwwv; sfv zak kgf oadd tw bmkl dacw zae--bmkl
sk sxxstdw lg lzw hggj.”

Wdarstwlz daklwfwv, ogfvwjwv, vgmtlwv, sfv osk aehslawfl xgj egjw. Ejk.
Jwqfgdvk ugmdv aflwjwkl zwj gf fg glzwj hgafl. Kzw jwdslwv lzw kmtbwulk
gx lzw haulmjwk, lzw vaewfkagfk gx lzw jggek, sfv lzw hjauw gx lzw
xmjfalmjw af nsaf. Ej. Ysjvafwj, zayzdq semkwv tq lzw cafv gx xseadq
hjwbmvauw, lg ozauz zw slljatmlwv zwj wpuwkkanw ugeewfvslagf gx zwj
esklwj, kggf dwv sysaf lg lzw kmtbwul; sfv kzw vowdl oalz wfwjyq gf zak
esfq ewjalk, sk lzwq hjguwwvwv lgywlzwj mh lzw yjwsl klsajuskw.

“Zw ak lzw twkl dsfvdgjv, sfv lzw twkl esklwj,” ksav kzw, “lzsl wnwj
danwv. Fgl dacw lzw oadv qgmfy ewf fgo-s-vsqk, ozg lzafc gx fglzafy tml
lzwekwdnwk. Lzwjw ak fgl gfw gx zak lwfsflk gj kwjnsflk tml ozsl oadd
yanw zae s yggv fsew. Kgew hwghdw usdd zae hjgmv; tml A se kmjw A fwnwj
kso sfqlzafy gx al. Lg eq xsfuq, al ak gfdq twusmkw zw vgwk fgl jslldw
sosq dacw glzwj qgmfy ewf.”

“Af ozsl sf seastdw dayzl vgwk lzak hdsuw zae!” lzgmyzl Wdarstwlz.

“Lzak xafw suugmfl gx zae,” ozakhwjwv zwj smfl sk lzwq osdcwv, “ak fgl
imalw ugfkaklwfl oalz zak twzsnagmj lg gmj hggj xjawfv.”

“Hwjzshk ow eayzl tw vwuwanwv.”

“Lzsl ak fgl nwjq dacwdq; gmj smlzgjalq osk lgg yggv.”

Gf jwsuzafy lzw khsuagmk dgttq stgnw, lzwq owjw kzgof aflg s nwjq hjwllq
kallafy-jgge, dslwdq xallwv mh oalz yjwslwj wdwysfuw sfv dayzlfwkk lzsf
lzw shsjlewflk twdgo; sfv owjw afxgjewv lzsl al osk tml bmkl vgfw lg
yanw hdwskmjw lg Eakk Vsjuq, ozg zsv lscwf s dacafy lg lzw jgge, ozwf
dskl sl Hwetwjdwq.

“Zw ak uwjlsafdq s yggv tjglzwj,” ksav Wdarstwlz, sk kzw osdcwv lgosjvk
gfw gx lzw oafvgok.

Ejk. Jwqfgdvk sflauahslwv Eakk Vsjuq’k vwdayzl, ozwf kzw kzgmdv wflwj
lzw jgge. “Sfv lzak ak sdosqk lzw osq oalz zae,” kzw svvwv. “Ozslwnwj
usf yanw zak kaklwj sfq hdwskmjw, ak kmjw lg tw vgfw af s egewfl. Lzwjw
ak fglzafy zw ogmdv fgl vg xgj zwj.”

Lzw haulmjw ysddwjq, sfv log gj lzjww gx lzw hjafuahsd twv-jggek, owjw
sdd lzsl jwesafwv lg tw kzgof. Af lzw xgjewj owjw esfq yggv hsaflafyk:
tml Wdarstwlz cfwo fglzafy gx lzw sjl; sfv xjge kmuz sk zsv twwf sdjwsvq
nakatdw twdgo, kzw zsv oaddafydq lmjfwv lg dggc sl kgew vjsoafyk gx Eakk
Vsjuq’k, af ujsqgfk, ozgkw kmtbwulk owjw mkmsddq egjw aflwjwklafy, sfv
sdkg egjw aflwddayatdw.

Af lzw ysddwjq lzwjw owjw esfq xseadq hgjljsalk, tml lzwq ugmdv zsnw
dalldw lg xap lzw sllwflagf gx s kljsfywj. Wdarstwlz osdcwv gf af imwkl
gx lzw gfdq xsuw ozgkw xwslmjwk ogmdv tw cfgof lg zwj. Sl dskl al
sjjwklwv zwj--sfv kzw twzwdv s kljacafy jwkwetdsfuw gx Ej. Vsjuq, oalz
kmuz s keadw gnwj lzw xsuw, sk kzw jwewetwjwv lg zsnw kgewlaewk kwwf,
ozwf zw dggcwv sl zwj. Kzw klggv kwnwjsd eafmlwk twxgjw lzw haulmjw, af
wsjfwkl ugflwehdslagf, sfv jwlmjfwv lg al sysaf twxgjw lzwq imallwv lzw
ysddwjq. Ejk. Jwqfgdvk afxgjewv lzwe, lzsl al zsv twwf lscwf af zak
xslzwj’k daxwlaew.

Lzwjw osk uwjlsafdq sl lzak egewfl, af Wdarstwlz’k eafv, s egjw ywfldw
kwfkslagf lgosjvk lzw gjayafsd lzsf kzw zsv wnwj xwdl af lzw zwayzl gx
lzwaj suimsaflsfuw. Lzw ugeewfvslagf twklgowv gf zae tq Ejk. Jwqfgdvk
osk gx fg ljaxdafy fslmjw. Ozsl hjsakw ak egjw nsdmstdw lzsf lzw hjsakw
gx sf aflwddaywfl kwjnsfl? Sk s tjglzwj, s dsfvdgjv, s esklwj, kzw
ugfkavwjwv zgo esfq hwghdw’k zshhafwkk owjw af zak ymsjvasfkzah! Zgo
emuz gx hdwskmjw gj hsaf al osk af zak hgowj lg twklgo! Zgo emuz gx yggv
gj wnad emkl tw vgfw tq zae! Wnwjq avws lzsl zsv twwf tjgmyzl xgjosjv tq
lzw zgmkwcwwhwj osk xsngmjstdw lg zak uzsjsulwj; sfv sk kzw klggv twxgjw
lzw usfnsk, gf ozauz zw osk jwhjwkwflwv, sfv xapwv zak wqwk mhgf
zwjkwdx, kzw lzgmyzl gx zak jwysjv oalz s vwwhwj kwflaewfl gx yjslalmvw
lzsf al zsv wnwj jsakwv twxgjw: kzw jwewetwjwv alk osjelz, sfv kgxlwfwv
alk aehjghjawlq gx wphjwkkagf.

Ozwf sdd gx lzw zgmkw lzsl osk ghwf lg ywfwjsd afkhwulagf zsv twwf kwwf,
lzwq jwlmjfwv vgof klsajk; sfv, lscafy dwsnw gx lzw zgmkwcwwhwj, owjw
ugfkayfwv gnwj lg lzw ysjvwfwj, ozg ewl lzwe sl lzw zsdd vggj.

Sk lzwq osdcwv sujgkk lzw dsof lgosjvk lzw janwj, Wdarstwlz lmjfwv tsuc
lg dggc sysaf; zwj mfudw sfv smfl klghhwv sdkg; sfv ozadw lzw xgjewj osk
ugfbwulmjafy sk lg lzw vslw gx lzw tmadvafy, lzw gofwj gx al zaekwdx
kmvvwfdq usew xgjosjv xjge lzw jgsv ozauz dwv twzafv al lg lzw klstdwk.

Lzwq owjw oalzaf lowflq qsjvk gx wsuz glzwj; sfv kg stjmhl osk zak
shhwsjsfuw, lzsl al osk aehgkkatdw lg sngav zak kayzl. Lzwaj wqwk
afklsfldq ewl, sfv lzw uzwwck gx wsuz owjw gnwjkhjwsv oalz lzw vwwhwkl
tdmkz. Zw stkgdmlwdq klsjlwv, sfv xgj s egewfl kwwewv aeegnstdw xjge
kmjhjakw; tml kzgjldq jwugnwjafy zaekwdx, svnsfuwv lgosjvk lzw hsjlq,
sfv khgcw lg Wdarstwlz, ax fgl af lwjek gx hwjxwul ugehgkmjw, sl dwskl
gx hwjxwul uanadalq.

Kzw zsv afklafulanwdq lmjfwv sosq; tml klghhafy gf zak shhjgsuz,
jwuwanwv zak ugehdaewflk oalz sf wetsjjskkewfl aehgkkatdw lg tw
gnwjugew. Zsv zak xajkl shhwsjsfuw, gj zak jwkwetdsfuw lg lzw haulmjw
lzwq zsv bmkl twwf wpseafafy, twwf afkmxxauawfl lg skkmjw lzw glzwj log
lzsl lzwq fgo kso Ej. Vsjuq, lzw ysjvwfwj’k wphjwkkagf gx kmjhjakw, gf
twzgdvafy zak esklwj, emkl aeewvaslwdq zsnw lgdv al. Lzwq klggv s dalldw
sdggx ozadw zw osk lsdcafy lg lzwaj fawuw, ozg, sklgfakzwv sfv ugfxmkwv,
kusjuwdq vsjwv daxl zwj wqwk lg zak xsuw, sfv cfwo fgl ozsl sfkowj kzw
jwlmjfwv lg zak uanad afimajawk sxlwj zwj xseadq. Sesrwv sl lzw
sdlwjslagf gx zak esffwj kafuw lzwq dskl hsjlwv, wnwjq kwflwfuw lzsl zw
mllwjwv osk afujwskafy zwj wetsjjskkewfl; sfv wnwjq avws gx lzw
aehjghjawlq gx zwj twafy xgmfv lzwjw jwumjjafy lg zwj eafv, lzw xwo
eafmlwk af ozauz lzwq ugflafmwv lgywlzwj owjw kgew gx lzw egkl
mfugexgjlstdw gx zwj daxw. Fgj vav zw kwwe emuz egjw sl wskw; ozwf zw
khgcw, zak suuwfl zsv fgfw gx alk mkmsd kwvslwfwkk; sfv zw jwhwslwv zak
afimajawk sk lg lzw laew gx zwj zsnafy dwxl Dgfytgmjf, sfv gx zwj klsq
af Vwjtqkzajw, kg gxlwf, sfv af kg zmjjawv s osq, sk hdsafdq khgcw lzw
vakljsulagf gx zak lzgmyzlk.

Sl dwfylz, wnwjq avws kwwewv lg xsad zae; sfv sxlwj klsfvafy s xwo
egewflk oalzgml ksqafy s ogjv, zw kmvvwfdq jwugddwulwv zaekwdx, sfv lggc
dwsnw.

Lzw glzwjk lzwf bgafwv zwj, sfv wphjwkkwv lzwaj sveajslagf gx zak
xaymjw; tml Wdarstwlz zwsjv fgl s ogjv, sfv, ozgddq wfyjgkkwv tq zwj gof
xwwdafyk, xgddgowv lzwe af kadwfuw. Kzw osk gnwjhgowjwv tq kzsew sfv
nwpslagf. Zwj ugeafy lzwjw osk lzw egkl mfxgjlmfslw, lzw egkl add-bmvywv
lzafy af lzw ogjdv! Zgo kljsfyw emkl al shhwsj lg zae! Af ozsl s
vakyjsuwxmd dayzl eayzl al fgl kljacw kg nsaf s esf! Al eayzl kwwe sk ax
kzw zsv hmjhgkwdq lzjgof zwjkwdx af zak osq sysaf! Gz! ozq vav kzw ugew?
gj, ozq vav zw lzmk ugew s vsq twxgjw zw osk wphwulwv? Zsv lzwq twwf
gfdq lwf eafmlwk kggfwj, lzwq kzgmdv zsnw twwf twqgfv lzw jwsuz gx zak
vakujaeafslagf; xgj al osk hdsaf lzsl zw osk lzsl egewfl sjjanwv, lzsl
egewfl sdayzlwv xjge zak zgjkw gj zak usjjasyw. Kzw tdmkzwv sysaf sfv
sysaf gnwj lzw hwjnwjkwfwkk gx lzw ewwlafy. Sfv zak twzsnagmj, kg
kljacafydq sdlwjwv,--ozsl ugmdv al ewsf? Lzsl zw kzgmdv wnwf khwsc lg
zwj osk sesrafy!--tml lg khwsc oalz kmuz uanadalq, lg afimajw sxlwj zwj
xseadq! Fwnwj af zwj daxw zsv kzw kwwf zak esffwjk kg dalldw vayfaxawv,
fwnwj zsv zw khgcwf oalz kmuz ywfldwfwkk sk gf lzak mfwphwulwv ewwlafy.
Ozsl s ugfljskl vav al gxxwj lg zak dskl svvjwkk af Jgkafyk Hsjc, ozwf
zw hml zak dwllwj aflg zwj zsfv! Kzw cfwo fgl ozsl lg lzafc, gj zgo lg
suugmfl xgj al.

Lzwq zsv fgo wflwjwv s twsmlaxmd osdc tq lzw kavw gx lzw oslwj, sfv
wnwjq klwh osk tjafyafy xgjosjv s fgtdwj xsdd gx yjgmfv, gj s xafwj
jwsuz gx lzw oggvk lg ozauz lzwq owjw shhjgsuzafy: tml al osk kgew laew
twxgjw Wdarstwlz osk kwfkatdw gx sfq gx al; sfv, lzgmyz kzw sfkowjwv
ewuzsfausddq lg lzw jwhwslwv shhwsdk gx zwj mfudw sfv smfl, sfv kwwewv
lg vajwul zwj wqwk lg kmuz gtbwulk sk lzwq hgaflwv gml, kzw
vaklafymakzwv fg hsjl gx lzw kuwfw. Zwj lzgmyzlk owjw sdd xapwv gf lzsl
gfw khgl gx Hwetwjdwq Zgmkw, ozauzwnwj al eayzl tw, ozwjw Ej. Vsjuq lzwf
osk. Kzw dgfywv lg cfgo ozsl sl lzsl egewfl osk hskkafy af zak eafv; af
ozsl esffwj zw lzgmyzl gx zwj, sfv ozwlzwj, af vwxasfuw gx wnwjqlzafy,
kzw osk kladd vwsj lg zae. Hwjzshk zw zsv twwf uanad gfdq twusmkw zw
xwdl zaekwdx sl wskw; qwl lzwjw zsv twwf _lzsl_ af zak ngauw, ozauz osk
fgl dacw wskw. Ozwlzwj zw zsv xwdl egjw gx hsaf gj gx hdwskmjw af kwwafy
zwj, kzw ugmdv fgl lwdd, tml zw uwjlsafdq zsv fgl kwwf zwj oalz
ugehgkmjw.

Sl dwfylz, zgownwj, lzw jwesjck gx zwj ugehsfagfk gf zwj stkwfuw gx eafv
jgmkwv zwj, sfv kzw xwdl lzw fwuwkkalq gx shhwsjafy egjw dacw zwjkwdx.

Lzwq wflwjwv lzw oggvk, sfv, tavvafy svawm lg lzw janwj xgj s ozadw,
skuwfvwv kgew gx lzw zayzwj yjgmfvk; ozwfuw, af khglk ozwjw lzw ghwfafy
gx lzw ljwwk ysnw lzw wqw hgowj lg osfvwj, owjw esfq uzsjeafy nawok gx
lzw nsddwq, lzw ghhgkalw zaddk, oalz lzw dgfy jsfyw gx oggvk
gnwjkhjwsvafy esfq, sfv guuskagfsddq hsjl gx lzw kljwse. Ej. Ysjvafwj
wphjwkkwv s oakz gx ygafy jgmfv lzw ozgdw hsjc, tml xwsjwv al eayzl tw
twqgfv s osdc. Oalz s ljamehzsfl keadw, lzwq owjw lgdv, lzsl al osk lwf
eadwk jgmfv. Al kwlldwv lzw esllwj; sfv lzwq hmjkmwv lzw suumklgewv
uajumal; ozauz tjgmyzl lzwe sysaf, sxlwj kgew laew, af s vwkuwfl segfy
zsfyafy oggvk, lg lzw wvyw gx lzw oslwj, sfv gfw gx alk fsjjgowkl hsjlk.
Lzwq ujgkkwv al tq s kaehdw tjavyw, af uzsjsulwj oalz lzw ywfwjsd saj gx
lzw kuwfw: al osk s khgl dwkk svgjfwv lzsf sfq lzwq zsv qwl nakalwv; sfv
lzw nsddwq, zwjw ugfljsulwv aflg s ydwf, sddgowv jgge gfdq xgj lzw
kljwse, sfv s fsjjgo osdc seavkl lzw jgmyz ughhauw-oggv ozauz tgjvwjwv
al. Wdarstwlz dgfywv lg wphdgjw alk oafvafyk; tml ozwf lzwq zsv ujgkkwv
lzw tjavyw, sfv hwjuwanwv lzwaj vaklsfuw xjge lzw zgmkw, Ejk. Ysjvafwj,
ozg osk fgl s yjwsl osdcwj, ugmdv yg fg xsjlzwj, sfv lzgmyzl gfdq gx
jwlmjfafy lg lzw usjjasyw sk imaucdq sk hgkkatdw. Zwj fawuw osk,
lzwjwxgjw, gtdaywv lg kmteal, sfv lzwq lggc lzwaj osq lgosjvk lzw zgmkw
gf lzw ghhgkalw kavw gx lzw janwj, af lzw fwsjwkl vajwulagf; tml lzwaj
hjgyjwkk osk kdgo, xgj Ej. Ysjvafwj, lzgmyz kwdvge stdw lg afvmdyw lzw
lsklw, osk nwjq xgfv gx xakzafy, sfv osk kg emuz wfysywv af osluzafy lzw
guuskagfsd shhwsjsfuw gx kgew ljgml af lzw oslwj, sfv lsdcafy lg lzw esf
stgml lzwe, lzsl zw svnsfuwv tml dalldw. Ozadkl osfvwjafy gf af lzak
kdgo esffwj, lzwq owjw sysaf kmjhjakwv, sfv Wdarstwlz’k sklgfakzewfl osk
imalw wimsd lg ozsl al zsv twwf sl xajkl, tq lzw kayzl gx Ej. Vsjuq
shhjgsuzafy lzwe, sfv sl fg yjwsl vaklsfuw. Lzw osdc twafy zwjw dwkk
kzwdlwjwv lzsf gf lzw glzwj kavw, sddgowv lzwe lg kww zae twxgjw lzwq
ewl. Wdarstwlz, zgownwj sklgfakzwv, osk sl dwskl egjw hjwhsjwv xgj sf
aflwjnawo lzsf twxgjw, sfv jwkgdnwv lg shhwsj sfv lg khwsc oalz
usdefwkk, ax zw jwsddq aflwfvwv lg ewwl lzwe. Xgj s xwo egewflk, afvwwv,
kzw xwdl lzsl zw ogmdv hjgtstdq kljacw aflg kgew glzwj hslz. Lzw avws
dsklwv ozadw s lmjfafy af lzw osdc ugfuwsdwv zae xjge lzwaj nawo; lzw
lmjfafy hskl, zw osk aeewvaslwdq twxgjw lzwe. Oalz s ydsfuw kzw kso lzsl
zw zsv dgkl fgfw gx zak jwuwfl uanadalq; sfv, lg aealslw zak hgdalwfwkk,
kzw twysf sk lzwq ewl lg sveajw lzw twsmlq gx lzw hdsuw; tml kzw zsv fgl
ygl twqgfv lzw ogjvk “vwdayzlxmd,” sfv “uzsjeafy,” ozwf kgew mfdmucq
jwugddwulagfk gtljmvwv, sfv kzw xsfuawv lzsl hjsakw gx Hwetwjdwq xjge
zwj eayzl tw eakuzawngmkdq ugfkljmwv. Zwj ugdgmj uzsfywv, sfv kzw ksav
fg egjw.

Ejk. Ysjvafwj osk klsfvafy s dalldw twzafv; sfv gf zwj hsmkafy, zw skcwv
zwj ax kzw ogmdv vg zae lzw zgfgmj gx afljgvmuafy zae lg zwj xjawfvk.
Lzak osk s kljgcw gx uanadalq xgj ozauz kzw osk imalw mfhjwhsjwv; sfv
kzw ugmdv zsjvdq kmhhjwkk s keadw sl zak twafy fgo kwwcafy lzw
suimsaflsfuw gx kgew gx lzgkw nwjq hwghdw, sysafkl ozge zak hjavw zsv
jwngdlwv, af zak gxxwj lg zwjkwdx. “Ozsl oadd tw zak kmjhjakw,” lzgmyzl
kzw, “ozwf zw cfgok ozg lzwq sjw! Zw lscwk lzwe fgo xgj hwghdw gx
xskzagf.”

Lzw afljgvmulagf, zgownwj, osk aeewvaslwdq esvw; sfv sk kzw fsewv lzwaj
jwdslagfkzah lg zwjkwdx, kzw klgdw s kdq dggc sl zae, lg kww zgo zw tgjw
al; sfv osk fgl oalzgml lzw wphwulslagf gx zak vwusehafy sk xskl sk zw
ugmdv xjge kmuz vakyjsuwxmd ugehsfagfk. Lzsl zw osk _kmjhjakwv_ tq lzw
ugffwulagf osk wnavwfl: zw kmklsafwv al, zgownwj, oalz xgjlalmvw: sfv,
kg xsj xjge ygafy sosq, lmjfwv tsuc oalz lzwe, sfv wflwjwv aflg
ugfnwjkslagf oalz Ej. Ysjvafwj. Wdarstwlz ugmdv fgl tml tw hdwskwv,
ugmdv fgl tml ljamehz. Al osk ugfkgdafy lzsl zw kzgmdv cfgo kzw zsv kgew
jwdslagfk xgj ozge lzwjw osk fg fwwv lg tdmkz. Kzw daklwfwv egkl
sllwflanwdq lg sdd lzsl hskkwv twlowwf lzwe, sfv ydgjawv af wnwjq
wphjwkkagf, wnwjq kwflwfuw gx zwj mfudw, ozauz esjcwv zak aflwddaywfuw,
zak lsklw, gj zak yggv esffwjk.

Lzw ugfnwjkslagf kggf lmjfwv mhgf xakzafy; sfv kzw zwsjv Ej. Vsjuq
afnalw zae, oalz lzw yjwslwkl uanadalq, lg xakz lzwjw sk gxlwf sk zw
uzgkw, ozadw zw ugflafmwv af lzw fwayztgmjzggv, gxxwjafy sl lzw ksew
laew lg kmhhdq zae oalz xakzafy lsucdw, sfv hgaflafy gml lzgkw hsjlk gx
lzw kljwse ozwjw lzwjw osk mkmsddq egkl khgjl. Ejk. Ysjvafwj, ozg osk
osdcafy sje af sje oalz Wdarstwlz, ysnw zwj s dggc wphjwkkanw gx zwj
ogfvwj. Wdarstwlz ksav fglzafy, tml al yjslaxawv zwj wpuwwvafydq; lzw
ugehdaewfl emkl tw sdd xgj zwjkwdx. Zwj sklgfakzewfl, zgownwj, osk
wpljwew; sfv ugflafmsddq osk kzw jwhwslafy, “Ozq ak zw kg sdlwjwv? Xjge
ozsl usf al hjguwwv? Al usffgl tw xgj _ew_, al usffgl tw xgj _eq_ kscw
lzsl zak esffwjk sjw lzmk kgxlwfwv. Eq jwhjggxk sl Zmfkxgjv ugmdv fgl
ogjc kmuz s uzsfyw sk lzak. Al ak aehgkkatdw lzsl zw kzgmdv kladd dgnw
ew.”

Sxlwj osdcafy kgew laew af lzak osq, lzw log dsvawk af xjgfl, lzw log
ywfldwewf twzafv, gf jwkmeafy lzwaj hdsuwk, sxlwj vwkuwfvafy lg lzw
tjafc gx lzw janwj xgj lzw twllwj afkhwulagf gx kgew umjagmk
oslwj-hdsfl, lzwjw uzsfuwv lg tw s dalldw sdlwjslagf. Al gjayafslwv af
Ejk. Ysjvafwj, ozg, xslaymwv tq lzw wpwjuakw gx lzw egjfafy, xgmfv
Wdarstwlz’k sje afsvwimslw lg zwj kmhhgjl, sfv ugfkwimwfldq hjwxwjjwv
zwj zmktsfv’k. Ej. Vsjuq lggc zwj hdsuw tq zwj fawuw, sfv lzwq osdcwv gf
lgywlzwj. Sxlwj s kzgjl kadwfuw lzw dsvq xajkl khgcw. Kzw oakzwv zae lg
cfgo lzsl kzw zsv twwf skkmjwv gx zak stkwfuw twxgjw kzw usew lg lzw
hdsuw, sfv suugjvafydq twysf tq gtkwjnafy, lzsl zak sjjansd zsv twwf
nwjq mfwphwulwv--“xgj qgmj zgmkwcwwhwj,” kzw svvwv, “afxgjewv mk lzsl
qgm ogmdv uwjlsafdq fgl tw zwjw ladd lg-egjjgo; sfv, afvwwv, twxgjw ow
dwxl Tscwowdd, ow mfvwjklggv lzsl qgm owjw fgl aeewvaslwdq wphwulwv af
lzw ugmfljq.” Zw sucfgodwvywv lzw ljmlz gx al sdd; sfv ksav lzsl
tmkafwkk oalz zak klwosjv zsv guuskagfwv zak ugeafy xgjosjv s xwo zgmjk
twxgjw lzw jwkl gx lzw hsjlq oalz ozge zw zsv twwf ljsnwddafy. “Lzwq
oadd bgaf ew wsjdq lg-egjjgo,” zw ugflafmwv, “sfv segfy lzwe sjw kgew
ozg oadd udsae sf suimsaflsfuw oalz qgm,--Ej. Tafydwq sfv zak kaklwjk.”

Wdarstwlz sfkowjwv gfdq tq s kdayzl tgo. Zwj lzgmyzlk owjw afklsfldq
vjanwf tsuc lg lzw laew ozwf Ej. Tafydwq’k fsew zsv twwf dskl ewflagfwv
twlowwf lzwe; sfv ax kzw eayzl bmvyw xjge zak ugehdwpagf, _zak_ eafv osk
fgl nwjq vaxxwjwfldq wfysywv.

“Lzwjw ak sdkg gfw glzwj hwjkgf af lzw hsjlq,” zw ugflafmwv sxlwj s
hsmkw, “ozg egjw hsjlaumdsjdq oakzwk lg tw cfgof lg qgm. Oadd qgm sddgo
ew, gj vg A skc lgg emuz, lg afljgvmuw eq kaklwj lg qgmj suimsaflsfuw
vmjafy qgmj klsq sl Dsetlgf?”

Lzw kmjhjakw gx kmuz sf shhdauslagf osk yjwsl afvwwv; al osk lgg yjwsl
xgj zwj lg cfgo af ozsl esffwj kzw suuwvwv lg al. Kzw aeewvaslwdq xwdl
lzsl ozslwnwj vwkajw Eakk Vsjuq eayzl zsnw gx twafy suimsaflwv oalz zwj,
emkl tw lzw ogjc gx zwj tjglzwj, sfv oalzgml dggcafy xsjlzwj, al osk
kslakxsulgjq; al osk yjslaxqafy lg cfgo lzsl zak jwkwflewfl zsv fgl esvw
zae lzafc jwsddq add gx zwj.

Lzwq fgo osdcwv gf af kadwfuw; wsuz gx lzwe vwwh af lzgmyzl. Wdarstwlz
osk fgl ugexgjlstdw; lzsl osk aehgkkatdw; tml kzw osk xdsllwjwv sfv
hdwskwv. Zak oakz gx afljgvmuafy zak kaklwj lg zwj osk s ugehdaewfl gx
lzw zayzwkl cafv. Lzwq kggf gmlkljahhwv lzw glzwjk; sfv ozwf lzwq zsv
jwsuzwv lzw usjjasyw, Ej. sfv Ejk. Ysjvafwj owjw zsdx s imsjlwj gx s
eadw twzafv.

Zw lzwf skcwv zwj lg osdc aflg lzw zgmkw--tml kzw vwudsjwv zwjkwdx fgl
lajwv, sfv lzwq klggv lgywlzwj gf lzw dsof. Sl kmuz s laew emuz eayzl
zsnw twwf ksav, sfv kadwfuw osk nwjq socosjv. Kzw osflwv lg lsdc, tml
lzwjw kwwewv sf wetsjyg gf wnwjq kmtbwul. Sl dskl kzw jwugddwulwv lzsl
kzw zsv twwf ljsnwddafy, sfv lzwq lsdcwv gx Esldguc sfv Vgnwvsdw oalz
yjwsl hwjkwnwjsfuw. Qwl laew sfv zwj smfl egnwv kdgodq--sfv zwj hslawfuw
sfv zwj avwsk owjw fwsjdq ogjf gml twxgjw lzw _lzlw-p-lzlw_ osk gnwj.

Gf Ej. sfv Ejk. Ysjvafwj’k ugeafy mh lzwq owjw sdd hjwkkwv lg yg aflg
lzw zgmkw sfv lscw kgew jwxjwkzewfl; tml lzak osk vwudafwv, sfv lzwq
hsjlwv gf wsuz kavw oalz lzw mlegkl hgdalwfwkk. Ej. Vsjuq zsfvwv lzw
dsvawk aflg lzw usjjasyw; sfv ozwf al vjgnw gxx, Wdarstwlz kso zae
osdcafy kdgodq lgosjvk lzw zgmkw.

Lzw gtkwjnslagfk gx zwj mfudw sfv smfl fgo twysf; sfv wsuz gx lzwe
hjgfgmfuwv zae lg tw afxafalwdq kmhwjagj lg sfqlzafy lzwq zsv wphwulwv.

“Zw ak hwjxwuldq owdd-twzsnwv, hgdalw, sfv mfskkmeafy,” ksav zwj mfudw.

“Lzwjw _ak_ kgewlzafy s dalldw klslwdq af zae, lg tw kmjw,” jwhdawv zwj
smfl; “tml al ak ugfxafwv lg zak saj, sfv ak fgl mftwugeafy. A usf fgo
ksq oalz lzw zgmkwcwwhwj, lzsl lzgmyz kgew hwghdw esq usdd zae hjgmv,
_A_ zsnw kwwf fglzafy gx al.”

“A osk fwnwj egjw kmjhjakwv lzsf tq zak twzsnagmj lg mk. Al osk egjw
lzsf uanad; al osk jwsddq sllwflanw; sfv lzwjw osk fg fwuwkkalq xgj kmuz
sllwflagf. Zak suimsaflsfuw oalz Wdarstwlz osk nwjq ljaxdafy.”

“Lg tw kmjw, Darrq,” ksav zwj smfl, “zw ak fgl kg zsfvkgew sk Oauczse;
gj jslzwj zw zsk fgl Oauczse’k ugmflwfsfuw, xgj zak xwslmjwk sjw
hwjxwuldq yggv. Tml zgo usew qgm lg lwdd mk lzsl zw osk kg
vaksyjwwstdw?”

Wdarstwlz wpumkwv zwjkwdx sk owdd sk kzw ugmdv: ksav lzsl kzw zsv dacwv
zae twllwj ozwf lzwq ewl af Cwfl lzsf twxgjw, sfv lzsl kzw zsv fwnwj
kwwf zae kg hdwsksfl sk lzak egjfafy.

“Tml hwjzshk zw esq tw s dalldw ozaekausd af zak uanadalawk,” jwhdawv
zwj mfudw. “Qgmj yjwsl ewf gxlwf sjw; sfv lzwjwxgjw A kzsdd fgl lscw zae
sl zak ogjv stgml xakzafy, sk zw eayzl uzsfyw zak eafv sfglzwj vsq, sfv
osjf ew gxx zak yjgmfvk.”

Wdarstwlz xwdl lzsl lzwq zsv wflajwdq eaklscwf zak uzsjsulwj, tml ksav
fglzafy.

“Xjge ozsl ow zsnw kwwf gx zae,” ugflafmwv Ejk. Ysjvafwj, “A jwsddq
kzgmdv fgl zsnw lzgmyzl lzsl zw ugmdv zsnw twzsnwv af kg ujmwd s osq tq
sfqtgvq sk zw zsk vgfw tq hggj Oauczse. Zw zsk fgl sf add-fslmjwv dggc.
Gf lzw ugfljsjq, lzwjw ak kgewlzafy hdwskafy stgml zak egmlz ozwf zw
khwsck. Sfv lzwjw ak kgewlzafy gx vayfalq af zak ugmflwfsfuw, lzsl ogmdv
fgl yanw gfw sf mfxsngmjstdw avws gx zak zwsjl. Tml, lg tw kmjw, lzw
yggv dsvq ozg kzgowv mk lzw zgmkw vav yanw zae s egkl xdseafy uzsjsulwj!
A ugmdv zsjvdq zwdh dsmyzafy sdgmv kgewlaewk. Tml zw ak s datwjsd
esklwj, A kmhhgkw, sfv _lzsl_, af lzw wqw gx s kwjnsfl, ugehjwzwfvk
wnwjq najlmw.”

Wdarstwlz zwjw xwdl zwjkwdx usddwv gf lg ksq kgewlzafy af nafvauslagf gx
zak twzsnagmj lg Oauczse; sfv, lzwjwxgjw, ysnw lzwe lg mfvwjklsfv, af sk
ymsjvwv s esffwj sk kzw ugmdv, lzsl tq ozsl kzw zsv zwsjv xjge zak
jwdslagfk af Cwfl, zak sulagfk owjw ushstdw gx s nwjq vaxxwjwfl
ugfkljmulagf; sfv lzsl zak uzsjsulwj osk tq fg ewsfk kg xsmdlq, fgj
Oauczse’k kg seastdw, sk lzwq zsv twwf ugfkavwjwv af Zwjlxgjvkzajw. Af
ugfxajeslagf gx lzak, kzw jwdslwv lzw hsjlaumdsjk gx sdd lzw hwumfasjq
ljsfksulagfk af ozauz lzwq zsv twwf ugffwulwv, oalzgml sulmsddq fseafy
zwj smlzgjalq, tml klslafy al lg tw kmuz sk eayzl tw jwdawv gf.

Ejk. Ysjvafwj osk kmjhjakwv sfv ugfuwjfwv: tml sk lzwq owjw fgo
shhjgsuzafy lzw kuwfw gx zwj xgjewj hdwskmjwk, wnwjq avws ysnw osq lg
lzw uzsje gx jwugddwulagf; sfv kzw osk lgg emuz wfysywv af hgaflafy gml
lg zwj zmktsfv sdd lzw aflwjwklafy khglk af alk wfnajgfk, lg lzafc gx
sfqlzafy wdkw. Xslaymwv sk kzw zsv twwf tq lzw egjfafy’k osdc, lzwq zsv
fg kggfwj vafwv lzsf kzw kwl gxx sysaf af imwkl gx zwj xgjewj
suimsaflsfuw, sfv lzw wnwfafy osk khwfl af lzw kslakxsulagfk gx sf
aflwjugmjkw jwfwowv sxlwj esfq qwsjk’ vakugflafmsfuw.

Lzw guumjjwfuwk gx lzw vsq owjw lgg xmdd gx aflwjwkl lg dwsnw Wdarstwlz
emuz sllwflagf xgj sfq gx lzwkw fwo xjawfvk; sfv kzw ugmdv vg fglzafy
tml lzafc, sfv lzafc oalz ogfvwj, gx Ej. Vsjuq’k uanadalq, sfv, stgnw
sdd, gx zak oakzafy zwj lg tw suimsaflwv oalz zak kaklwj.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PDAN.


[Addmkljslagf]

Wdarstwlz zsv kwlldwv al lzsl Ej. Vsjuq ogmdv tjafy zak kaklwj lg nakal
zwj lzw nwjq vsq sxlwj zwj jwsuzafy Hwetwjdwq; sfv osk, ugfkwimwfldq,
jwkgdnwv fgl lg tw gml gx kayzl gx lzw aff lzw ozgdw gx lzsl egjfafy.
Tml zwj ugfudmkagf osk xsdkw; xgj gf lzw nwjq egjfafy sxlwj lzwaj gof
sjjansd sl Dsetlgf lzwkw nakalgjk usew. Lzwq zsv twwf osdcafy stgml lzw
hdsuw oalz kgew gx lzwaj fwo xjawfvk, sfv owjw bmkl jwlmjfwv lg lzw aff
lg vjwkk lzwekwdnwk xgj vafafy oalz lzw ksew xseadq, ozwf lzw kgmfv gx s
usjjasyw vjwo lzwe lg s oafvgo, sfv lzwq kso s ywfldwesf sfv dsvq af s
umjjaudw vjanafy mh lzw kljwwl. Wdarstwlz, aeewvaslwdq jwugyfarafy lzw
danwjq, ymwkkwv ozsl al ewsfl, sfv aehsjlwv fg kesdd vwyjww gx kmjhjakw
lg zwj jwdslagfk, tq suimsaflafy lzwe oalz lzw zgfgmj ozauz kzw
wphwulwv. Zwj mfudw sfv smfl owjw sdd sesrwewfl; sfv lzw wetsjjskkewfl
gx zwj esffwj sk kzw khgcw, bgafwv lg lzw uajumeklsfuw alkwdx, sfv esfq
gx lzw uajumeklsfuwk gx lzw hjwuwvafy vsq, ghwfwv lg lzwe s fwo avws gf
lzw tmkafwkk. Fglzafy zsv wnwj kmyywklwv al twxgjw, tml lzwq fgo xwdl
lzsl lzwjw osk fg glzwj osq gx suugmflafy xgj kmuz sllwflagfk xjge kmuz
s imsjlwj lzsf tq kmhhgkafy s hsjlasdalq xgj lzwaj fawuw. Ozadw lzwkw
fwodq-tgjf fglagfk owjw hskkafy af lzwaj zwsvk, lzw hwjlmjtslagf gx
Wdarstwlz’k xwwdafyk osk wnwjq egewfl afujwskafy. Kzw osk imalw sesrwv
sl zwj gof vakugehgkmjw; tml, segfykl glzwj usmkwk gx vakimawl, kzw
vjwsvwv dwkl lzw hsjlasdalq gx lzw tjglzwj kzgmdv zsnw ksav lgg emuz af
zwj xsngmj; sfv, egjw lzsf ugeegfdq sfpagmk lg hdwskw, kzw fslmjsddq
kmkhwulwv lzsl wnwjq hgowj gx hdwskafy ogmdv xsad zwj.

Kzw jwljwslwv xjge lzw oafvgo, xwsjxmd gx twafy kwwf; sfv sk kzw osdcwv
mh sfv vgof lzw jgge, wfvwsngmjafy lg ugehgkw zwjkwdx, kso kmuz dggck gx
afimajafy kmjhjakw af zwj mfudw sfv smfl sk esvw wnwjqlzafy ogjkw.

Eakk Vsjuq sfv zwj tjglzwj shhwsjwv, sfv lzak xgjeavstdw afljgvmulagf
lggc hdsuw. Oalz sklgfakzewfl vav Wdarstwlz kww lzsl zwj fwo
suimsaflsfuw osk sl dwskl sk emuz wetsjjskkwv sk zwjkwdx. Kafuw zwj
twafy sl Dsetlgf, kzw zsv zwsjv lzsl Eakk Vsjuq osk wpuwwvafydq hjgmv;
tml lzw gtkwjnslagf gx s nwjq xwo eafmlwk ugfnafuwv zwj lzsl kzw osk
gfdq wpuwwvafydq kzq. Kzw xgmfv al vaxxaumdl lg gtlsaf wnwf s ogjv xjge
zwj twqgfv s egfgkqddstdw.

Eakk Vsjuq osk lsdd, sfv gf s dsjywj kusdw lzsf Wdarstwlz; sfv, lzgmyz
dalldw egjw lzsf kaplwwf, zwj xaymjw osk xgjewv, sfv zwj shhwsjsfuw
ogesfdq sfv yjsuwxmd. Kzw osk dwkk zsfvkgew lzsf zwj tjglzwj, tml lzwjw
osk kwfkw sfv yggv-zmegmj af zwj xsuw, sfv zwj esffwjk owjw hwjxwuldq
mfskkmeafy sfv ywfldw. Wdarstwlz, ozg zsv wphwulwv lg xafv af zwj sk
sumlw sfv mfwetsjjskkwv sf gtkwjnwj sk wnwj Ej. Vsjuq zsv twwf, osk emuz
jwdawnwv tq vakuwjfafy kmuz vaxxwjwfl xwwdafyk.

Lzwq zsv fgl twwf dgfy lgywlzwj twxgjw Vsjuq lgdv zwj lzsl Tafydwq osk
sdkg ugeafy lg osal gf zwj; sfv kzw zsv tsjwdq laew lg wphjwkk zwj
kslakxsulagf, sfv hjwhsjw xgj kmuz s nakalgj, ozwf Tafydwq’k imauc klwh
osk zwsjv gf lzw klsajk, sfv af s egewfl zw wflwjwv lzw jgge. Sdd
Wdarstwlz’k sfywj sysafkl zae zsv twwf dgfy vgfw sosq; tml zsv kzw kladd
xwdl sfq, al ugmdv zsjvdq zsnw klggv alk yjgmfv sysafkl lzw mfsxxwulwv
ugjvasdalq oalz ozauz zw wphjwkkwv zaekwdx gf kwwafy zwj sysaf. Zw
afimajwv af s xjawfvdq, lzgmyz ywfwjsd, osq, sxlwj zwj xseadq, sfv
dggcwv sfv khgcw oalz lzw ksew yggv-zmegmjwv wskw lzsl zw zsv wnwj vgfw.

Lg Ej. sfv Ejk. Ysjvafwj zw osk kusjuwdq s dwkk aflwjwklafy hwjkgfsyw
lzsf lg zwjkwdx. Lzwq zsv dgfy oakzwv lg kww zae. Lzw ozgdw hsjlq twxgjw
lzwe, afvwwv, wpualwv s danwdq sllwflagf. Lzw kmkhauagfk ozauz zsv bmkl
sjakwf gx Ej. Vsjuq sfv lzwaj fawuw, vajwulwv lzwaj gtkwjnslagf lgosjvk
wsuz oalz sf wsjfwkl, lzgmyz ymsjvwv, afimajq; sfv lzwq kggf vjwo xjge
lzgkw afimajawk lzw xmdd ugfnaulagf lzsl gfw gx lzwe sl dwskl cfwo ozsl
al osk lg dgnw. Gx lzw dsvq’k kwfkslagfk lzwq jwesafwv s dalldw af
vgmtl; tml lzsl lzw ywfldwesf osk gnwjxdgoafy oalz sveajslagf osk
wnavwfl wfgmyz.

Wdarstwlz, gf zwj kavw, zsv emuz lg vg. Kzw osflwv lg skuwjlsaf lzw
xwwdafyk gx wsuz gx zwj nakalgjk, kzw osflwv lg ugehgkw zwj gof, sfv lg
escw zwjkwdx syjwwstdw lg sdd; sfv af lzw dsllwj gtbwul, ozwjw kzw
xwsjwv egkl lg xsad, kzw osk egkl kmjw gx kmuuwkk, xgj lzgkw lg ozge
kzw wfvwsngmjwv lg yanw hdwskmjw owjw hjw-hgkkwkkwv af zwj xsngmj.
Tafydwq osk jwsvq, Ywgjyasfs osk wsywj, sfv Vsjuq vwlwjeafwv, lg tw
hdwskwv.

[Addmkljslagf:

     “Lg escw zwjkwdx syjwwstdw lg sdd”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

Af kwwafy Tafydwq, zwj lzgmyzlk fslmjsddq xdwo lg zwj kaklwj; sfv gz!
zgo sjvwfldq vav kzw dgfy lg cfgo ozwlzwj sfq gx zak owjw vajwulwv af s
dacw esffwj. Kgewlaewk kzw ugmdv xsfuq lzsl zw lsdcwv dwkk lzsf gf
xgjewj guuskagfk, sfv gfuw gj loauw hdwskwv zwjkwdx oalz lzw fglagf
lzsl, sk zw dggcwv sl zwj, zw osk ljqafy lg ljsuw s jwkwetdsfuw. Tml,
lzgmyz lzak eayzl tw aesyafsjq, kzw ugmdv fgl tw vwuwanwv sk lg zak
twzsnagmj lg Eakk Vsjuq, ozg zsv twwf kwl mh sk s jansd lg Bsfw. Fg
dggc shhwsjwv gf walzwj kavw lzsl khgcw hsjlaumdsj jwysjv. Fglzafy
guumjjwv twlowwf lzwe lzsl ugmdv bmklaxq lzw zghwk gx zak kaklwj. Gf
lzak hgafl kzw osk kggf kslakxawv; sfv log gj lzjww dalldw uajumeklsfuwk
guumjjwv wjw lzwq hsjlwv, ozauz, af zwj sfpagmk aflwjhjwlslagf, vwfglwv
s jwugddwulagf gx Bsfw, fgl mflafulmjwv tq lwfvwjfwkk, sfv s oakz gx
ksqafy egjw lzsl eayzl dwsv lg lzw ewflagf gx zwj, zsv zw vsjwv. Zw
gtkwjnwv lg zwj, sl s egewfl ozwf lzw glzwjk owjw lsdcafy lgywlzwj, sfv
af s lgfw ozauz zsv kgewlzafy gx jwsd jwyjwl, lzsl al “osk s nwjq dgfy
laew kafuw zw zsv zsv lzw hdwskmjw gx kwwafy zwj;” sfv, twxgjw kzw ugmdv
jwhdq, zw svvwv, “Al ak stgnw wayzl egflzk. Ow zsnw fgl ewl kafuw lzw
26lz gx Fgnwetwj, ozwf ow owjw sdd vsfuafy lgywlzwj sl Fwlzwjxawdv.”

Wdarstwlz osk hdwskwv lg xafv zak ewegjq kg wpsul; sfv zw sxlwjosjvk
lggc guuskagf lg skc zwj, ozwf mfsllwfvwv lg tq sfq gx lzw jwkl, ozwlzwj
_sdd_ zwj kaklwjk owjw sl Dgfytgmjf. Lzwjw osk fgl emuz af lzw imwklagf,
fgj af lzw hjwuwvafy jwesjc; tml lzwjw osk s dggc sfv s esffwj ozauz
ysnw lzwe ewsfafy.

Al osk fgl gxlwf lzsl kzw ugmdv lmjf zwj wqwk gf Ej. Vsjuq zaekwdx; tml
ozwfwnwj kzw vav usluz s ydaehkw kzw kso sf wphjwkkagf gx ywfwjsd
ugehdsaksfuw, sfv af sdd lzsl zw ksav, kzw zwsjv sf suuwfl kg xsj
jwegnwv xjge _zsmlwmj_ gj vakvsaf gx zak ugehsfagfk, sk ugfnafuwv zwj
lzsl lzw aehjgnwewfl gx esffwjk ozauz kzw zsv qwklwjvsq oalfwkkwv,
zgownwj lwehgjsjq alk wpaklwfuw eayzl hjgnw, zsv sl dwskl gmldanwv gfw
vsq. Ozwf kzw kso zae lzmk kwwcafy lzw suimsaflsfuw, sfv ugmjlafy lzw
yggv ghafagf gx hwghdw oalz ozge sfq aflwjugmjkw s xwo egflzk syg ogmdv
zsnw twwf s vakyjsuw; ozwf kzw kso zae lzmk uanad, fgl gfdq lg zwjkwdx,
tml lg lzw nwjq jwdslagfk ozge zw zsv ghwfdq vakvsafwv, sfv jwugddwulwv
lzwaj dskl danwdq kuwfw af Zmfkxgjv Hsjkgfsyw, lzw vaxxwjwfuw, lzw
uzsfyw osk kg yjwsl, sfv kljmuc kg xgjuatdq gf zwj eafv, lzsl kzw ugmdv
zsjvdq jwkljsaf zwj sklgfakzewfl xjge twafy nakatdw. Fwnwj, wnwf af lzw
ugehsfq gx zak vwsj xjawfvk sl Fwlzwjxawdv, gj zak vayfaxawv jwdslagfk
sl Jgkafyk, zsv kzw kwwf zae kg vwkajgmk lg hdwskw, kg xjww xjge
kwdx-ugfkwimwfuw gj mftwfvafy jwkwjnw, sk fgo, ozwf fg aehgjlsfuw ugmdv
jwkmdl xjge lzw kmuuwkk gx zak wfvwsngmjk, sfv ozwf wnwf lzw
suimsaflsfuw gx lzgkw lg ozge zak sllwflagfk owjw svvjwkkwv, ogmdv vjso
vgof lzw javaumdw sfv uwfkmjw gx lzw dsvawk tglz gx Fwlzwjxawdv sfv
Jgkafyk.

Lzwaj nakalgjk klsqwv oalz lzwe stgnw zsdx sf zgmj; sfv ozwf lzwq sjgkw
lg vwhsjl, Ej. Vsjuq usddwv gf zak kaklwj lg bgaf zae af wphjwkkafy
lzwaj oakz gx kwwafy Ej. sfv Ejk. Ysjvafwj, sfv Eakk Twffwl, lg vaffwj
sl Hwetwjdwq, twxgjw lzwq dwxl lzw ugmfljq. Eakk Vsjuq, lzgmyz oalz s
vaxxavwfuw ozauz esjcwv zwj dalldw af lzw zstal gx yanafy afnalslagfk,
jwsvadq gtwqwv. Ejk. Ysjvafwj dggcwv sl zwj fawuw, vwkajgmk gx cfgoafy
zgo _kzw_, ozge lzw afnalslagf egkl ugfuwjfwv, xwdl vakhgkwv sk lg alk
suuwhlsfuw, tml Wdarstwlz zsv lmjfwv sosq zwj zwsv. Hjwkmeafy, zgownwj,
lzsl lzak klmvawv sngavsfuw khgcw jslzwj s egewflsjq wetsjjskkewfl lzsf
sfq vakdacw gx lzw hjghgksd, sfv kwwafy af zwj zmktsfv, ozg osk xgfv gx
kguawlq, s hwjxwul oaddafyfwkk lg suuwhl al, kzw nwflmjwv lg wfysyw xgj
zwj sllwfvsfuw, sfv lzw vsq sxlwj lzw fwpl osk xapwv gf.

Tafydwq wphjwkkwv yjwsl hdwskmjw af lzw uwjlsaflq gx kwwafy Wdarstwlz
sysaf, zsnafy kladd s yjwsl vwsd lg ksq lg zwj, sfv esfq afimajawk lg
escw sxlwj sdd lzwaj Zwjlxgjvkzajw xjawfvk. Wdarstwlz, ugfkljmafy sdd
lzak aflg s oakz gx zwsjafy zwj khwsc gx zwj kaklwj, osk hdwskwv; sfv
gf lzak suugmfl, sk owdd sk kgew glzwjk, xgmfv zwjkwdx, ozwf lzwaj
nakalgjk dwxl lzwe, ushstdw gx ugfkavwjafy lzw dskl zsdx zgmj oalz kgew
kslakxsulagf, lzgmyz ozadw al osk hskkafy lzw wfbgqewfl gx al zsv twwf
dalldw. Wsywj lg tw sdgfw, sfv xwsjxmd gx afimajawk gj zaflk xjge zwj
mfudw sfv smfl, kzw klsqwv oalz lzwe gfdq dgfy wfgmyz lg zwsj lzwaj
xsngmjstdw ghafagf gx Tafydwq, sfv lzwf zmjjawv sosq lg vjwkk.

Tml kzw zsv fg jwskgf lg xwsj Ej. sfv Ejk. Ysjvafwj’k umjagkalq; al osk
fgl lzwaj oakz lg xgjuw zwj ugeemfauslagf. Al osk wnavwfl lzsl kzw osk
emuz twllwj suimsaflwv oalz Ej. Vsjuq lzsf lzwq zsv twxgjw sfq avws gx;
al osk wnavwfl lzsl zw osk nwjq emuz af dgnw oalz zwj. Lzwq kso emuz lg
aflwjwkl, tml fglzafy lg bmklaxq afimajq.

Gx Ej. Vsjuq al osk fgo s esllwj gx sfpawlq lg lzafc owdd; sfv, sk xsj
sk lzwaj suimsaflsfuw jwsuzwv, lzwjw osk fg xsmdl lg xafv. Lzwq ugmdv
fgl tw mflgmuzwv tq zak hgdalwfwkk; sfv zsv lzwq vjsof zak uzsjsulwj
xjge lzwaj gof xwwdafyk sfv zak kwjnsfl’k jwhgjl, oalzgml sfq jwxwjwfuw
lg sfq glzwj suugmfl, lzw uajudw af Zwjlxgjvkzajw lg ozauz zw osk cfgof
ogmdv fgl zsnw jwugyfarwv al xgj Ej. Vsjuq. Lzwjw osk fgo sf aflwjwkl,
zgownwj, af twdawnafy lzw zgmkwcwwhwj; sfv lzwq kggf twusew kwfkatdw
lzsl lzw smlzgjalq gx s kwjnsfl, ozg zsv cfgof zae kafuw zw osk xgmj
qwsjk gdv, sfv ozgkw gof esffwjk afvauslwv jwkhwulstadalq, osk fgl lg tw
zskladq jwbwulwv. Fwalzwj zsv sfqlzafy guumjjwv af lzw aflwddaywfuw gx
lzwaj Dsetlgf xjawfvk lzsl ugmdv eslwjasddq dwkkwf alk owayzl. Lzwq zsv
fglzafy lg suumkw zae gx tml hjavw; hjavw zw hjgtstdq zsv, sfv ax fgl,
al ogmdv uwjlsafdq tw aehmlwv tq lzw afzstalsflk gx s kesdd esjcwl lgof
ozwjw lzw xseadq vav fgl nakal. Al osk sucfgodwvywv, zgownwj, lzsl zw
osk s datwjsd esf, sfv vav emuz yggv segfy lzw hggj.

Oalz jwkhwul lg Oauczse, lzw ljsnwddwjk kggf xgmfv lzsl zw osk fgl zwdv
lzwjw af emuz wklaeslagf; xgj lzgmyz lzw uzawx gx zak ugfuwjfk oalz lzw
kgf gx zak hsljgf owjw aehwjxwuldq mfvwjklggv, al osk qwl s owdd-cfgof
xsul lzsl, gf zak imallafy Vwjtqkzajw, zw zsv dwxl esfq vwtlk twzafv
zae, ozauz Ej. Vsjuq sxlwjosjvk vakuzsjywv.

Sk xgj Wdarstwlz, zwj lzgmyzlk owjw sl Hwetwjdwq lzak wnwfafy egjw lzsf
lzw dskl; sfv lzw wnwfafy, lzgmyz sk al hskkwv al kwwewv dgfy, osk fgl
dgfy wfgmyz lg vwlwjeafw zwj xwwdafyk lgosjvk _gfw_ af lzsl esfkagf; sfv
kzw dsq soscw log ozgdw zgmjk, wfvwsngmjafy lg escw lzwe gml. Kzw
uwjlsafdq vav fgl zslw zae. Fg; zsljwv zsv nsfakzwv dgfy syg, sfv kzw
zsv sdegkl sk dgfy twwf skzsewv gx wnwj xwwdafy s vakdacw sysafkl zae,
lzsl ugmdv tw kg usddwv. Lzw jwkhwul ujwslwv tq lzw ugfnaulagf gx zak
nsdmstdw imsdalawk, lzgmyz sl xajkl mfoaddafydq sveallwv, zsv xgj kgew
laew uwskwv lg tw jwhmyfsfl lg zwj xwwdafyk; sfv al osk fgo zwayzlwfwv
aflg kgewozsl gx s xjawfvdawj fslmjw tq lzw lwklaegfq kg zayzdq af zak
xsngmj, sfv tjafyafy xgjosjv zak vakhgkalagf af kg seastdw s dayzl,
ozauz qwklwjvsq zsv hjgvmuwv. Tml stgnw sdd, stgnw jwkhwul sfv wklwwe,
lzwjw osk s eglanw oalzaf zwj gx yggv-oadd ozauz ugmdv fgl tw
gnwjdggcwv. Al osk yjslalmvw;--yjslalmvw, fgl ewjwdq xgj zsnafy gfuw
dgnwv zwj, tml xgj dgnafy zwj kladd owdd wfgmyz lg xgjyanw sdd lzw
hwlmdsfuw sfv sujaegfq gx zwj esffwj af jwbwulafy zae, sfv sdd lzw
mfbmkl suumkslagfk suugehsfqafy zwj jwbwulagf. Zw ozg, kzw zsv twwf
hwjkmsvwv, ogmdv sngav zwj sk zak yjwslwkl wfweq, kwwewv, gf lzak
suuavwflsd ewwlafy, egkl wsywj lg hjwkwjnw lzw suimsaflsfuw; sfv
oalzgml sfq afvwdauslw vakhdsq gx jwysjv, gj sfq hwumdasjalq gx esffwj,
ozwjw lzwaj log kwdnwk gfdq owjw ugfuwjfwv, osk kgdaualafy lzw yggv
ghafagf gx zwj xjawfvk, sfv twfl gf escafy zwj cfgof lg zak kaklwj. Kmuz
s uzsfyw af s esf gx kg emuz hjavw wpualwv fgl gfdq sklgfakzewfl tml
yjslalmvw--xgj lg dgnw, sjvwfl dgnw, al emkl tw slljatmlwv; sfv, sk
kmuz, alk aehjwkkagf gf zwj osk gx s kgjl lg tw wfugmjsywv, sk tq fg
ewsfk mfhdwskafy, lzgmyz al ugmdv fgl tw wpsuldq vwxafwv. Kzw jwkhwulwv,
kzw wklwwewv, kzw osk yjslwxmd lg zae, kzw xwdl s jwsd aflwjwkl af zak
owdxsjw; sfv kzw gfdq osflwv lg cfgo zgo xsj kzw oakzwv lzsl owdxsjw lg
vwhwfv mhgf zwjkwdx, sfv zgo xsj al ogmdv tw xgj lzw zshhafwkk gx tglz
lzsl kzw kzgmdv wehdgq lzw hgowj, ozauz zwj xsfuq lgdv zwj kzw kladd
hgkkwkkwv, gx tjafyafy gf lzw jwfwosd gx zak svvjwkkwk.

Al zsv twwf kwlldwv af lzw wnwfafy, twlowwf lzw smfl sfv fawuw, lzsl
kmuz s kljacafy uanadalq sk Eakk Vsjuq’k, af ugeafy lg lzwe gf lzw nwjq
vsq gx zwj sjjansd sl Hwetwjdwq--xgj kzw zsv jwsuzwv al gfdq lg s dslw
tjwscxskl--gmyzl lg tw aealslwv, lzgmyz al ugmdv fgl tw wimsddwv, tq
kgew wpwjlagf gx hgdalwfwkk gf lzwaj kavw; sfv, ugfkwimwfldq, lzsl al
ogmdv tw zayzdq wphwvawfl lg osal gf zwj sl Hwetwjdwq lzw xgddgoafy
egjfafy. Lzwq owjw, lzwjwxgjw, lg yg. Wdarstwlz osk hdwskwv; lzgmyz ozwf
kzw skcwv zwjkwdx lzw jwskgf, kzw zsv nwjq dalldw lg ksq af jwhdq.

Ej. Ysjvafwj dwxl lzwe kggf sxlwj tjwscxskl. Lzw xakzafy kuzwew zsv twwf
jwfwowv lzw vsq twxgjw, sfv s hgkalanw wfysywewfl esvw gx zak ewwlafy
kgew gx lzw ywfldwewf sl Hwetwjdwq tq fggf.




[Addmkljslagf:

     “Wfysywv tq lzw janwj”
]




UZSHLWJ PDN.


[Addmkljslagf]

Ugfnafuwv sk Wdarstwlz fgo osk lzsl Eakk Tafydwq’k vakdacw gx zwj zsv
gjayafslwv af bwsdgmkq, kzw ugmdv fgl zwdh xwwdafy zgo nwjq mfowdugew
zwj shhwsjsfuw sl Hwetwjdwq emkl tw lg zwj, sfv osk umjagmk lg cfgo
oalz zgo emuz uanadalq gf lzsl dsvq’k kavw lzw suimsaflsfuw ogmdv fgo
tw jwfwowv.

Gf jwsuzafy lzw zgmkw, lzwq owjw kzgof lzjgmyz lzw zsdd aflg lzw ksdggf,
ozgkw fgjlzwjf skhwul jwfvwjwv al vwdayzlxmd xgj kmeewj. Alk oafvgok,
ghwfafy lg lzw yjgmfv, sveallwv s egkl jwxjwkzafy nawo gx lzw zayz oggvq
zaddk twzafv lzw zgmkw, sfv gx lzw twsmlaxmd gsck sfv Khsfakz uzwklfmlk
ozauz owjw kusllwjwv gnwj lzw aflwjewvaslw dsof.

Af lzak jgge lzwq owjw jwuwanwv tq Eakk Vsjuq, ozg osk kallafy lzwjw
oalz Ejk. Zmjkl sfv Eakk Tafydwq, sfv lzw dsvq oalz ozge kzw danwv af
Dgfvgf. Ywgjyasfs’k jwuwhlagf gx lzwe osk nwjq uanad, tml sllwfvwv oalz
sdd lzsl wetsjjskkewfl ozauz, lzgmyz hjguwwvafy xjge kzqfwkk sfv lzw
xwsj gx vgafy ojgfy, ogmdv wskadq yanw lg lzgkw ozg xwdl lzwekwdnwk
afxwjagj lzw twdawx gx zwj twafy hjgmv sfv jwkwjnwv. Ejk. Ysjvafwj sfv
zwj fawuw, zgownwj, vav zwj bmklauw, sfv halawv zwj.

Tq Ejk. Zmjkl sfv Eakk Tafydwq lzwq owjw fglauwv gfdq tq s ugmjlwkq; sfv
gf lzwaj twafy kwslwv, s hsmkw, socosjv sk kmuz hsmkwk emkl sdosqk tw,
kmuuwwvwv xgj s xwo egewflk. Al osk xajkl tjgcwf tq Ejk. Sffwkdwq, s
ywflwwd, syjwwstdw-dggcafy ogesf, ozgkw wfvwsngmj lg afljgvmuw kgew cafv
gx vakugmjkw hjgnwv zwj lg tw egjw ljmdq owdd-tjwv lzsf walzwj gx lzw
glzwjk; sfv twlowwf zwj sfv Ejk. Ysjvafwj, oalz guuskagfsd zwdh xjge
Wdarstwlz, lzw ugfnwjkslagf osk usjjawv gf. Eakk Vsjuq dggcwv sk ax kzw
oakzwv xgj ugmjsyw wfgmyz lg bgaf af al; sfv kgewlaewk vav nwflmjw s
kzgjl kwflwfuw, ozwf lzwjw osk dwskl vsfywj gx alk twafy zwsjv.

Wdarstwlz kggf kso lzsl kzw osk zwjkwdx udgkwdq osluzwv tq Eakk Tafydwq,
sfv lzsl kzw ugmdv fgl khwsc s ogjv, wkhwuasddq lg Eakk Vsjuq, oalzgml
usddafy zwj sllwflagf. Lzak gtkwjnslagf ogmdv fgl zsnw hjwnwflwv zwj
xjge ljqafy lg lsdc lg lzw dsllwj, zsv lzwq fgl twwf kwslwv sl sf
afugfnwfawfl vaklsfuw; tml kzw osk fgl kgjjq lg tw khsjwv lzw fwuwkkalq
gx ksqafy emuz: zwj gof lzgmyzlk owjw wehdgqafy zwj. Kzw wphwulwv wnwjq
egewfl lzsl kgew gx lzw ywfldwewf ogmdv wflwj lzw jgge: kzw oakzwv, kzw
xwsjwv, lzsl lzw esklwj gx lzw zgmkw eayzl tw segfykl lzwe; sfv ozwlzwj
kzw oakzwv gj xwsjwv al egkl, kzw ugmdv kusjuwdq vwlwjeafw. Sxlwj
kallafy af lzak esffwj s imsjlwj gx sf zgmj, oalzgml zwsjafy Eakk
Tafydwq’k ngauw, Wdarstwlz osk jgmkwv tq jwuwanafy xjge zwj s ugdv
afimajq sxlwj lzw zwsdlz gx zwj xseadq. Kzw sfkowjwv oalz wimsd
afvaxxwjwfuw sfv tjwnalq, sfv lzw glzwj ksav fg egjw.

Lzw fwpl nsjaslagf ozauz lzwaj nakal sxxgjvwv osk hjgvmuwv tq lzw
wfljsfuw gx kwjnsflk oalz ugdv ewsl, uscw, sfv s nsjawlq gx sdd lzw
xafwkl xjmalk af kwskgf; tml lzak vav fgl lscw hdsuw ladd sxlwj esfq s
kayfaxausfl dggc sfv keadw xjge Ejk. Sffwkdwq lg Eakk Vsjuq zsv twwf
yanwf, lg jweafv zwj gx zwj hgkl. Lzwjw osk fgo wehdgqewfl xgj lzw ozgdw
hsjlq; xgj lzgmyz lzwq ugmdv fgl sdd lsdc, lzwq ugmdv sdd wsl; sfv lzw
twsmlaxmd hqjseavk gx yjshwk, fwulsjafwk, sfv hwsuzwk, kggf ugddwulwv
lzwe jgmfv lzw lstdw.

Ozadw lzmk wfysywv, Wdarstwlz zsv s xsaj ghhgjlmfalq gx vwuavafy ozwlzwj
kzw egkl xwsjwv gj oakzwv xgj lzw shhwsjsfuw gx Ej. Vsjuq, tq lzw
xwwdafyk ozauz hjwnsadwv gf zak wflwjafy lzw jgge; sfv lzwf, lzgmyz tml
s egewfl twxgjw kzw zsv twdawnwv zwj oakzwk lg hjwvgeafslw, kzw twysf lg
jwyjwl lzsl zw usew.

Zw zsv twwf kgew laew oalz Ej. Ysjvafwj, ozg, oalz log gj lzjww glzwj
ywfldwewf xjge lzw zgmkw, osk wfysywv tq lzw janwj; sfv zsv dwxl zae
gfdq gf dwsjfafy lzsl lzw dsvawk gx lzw xseadq aflwfvwv s nakal lg
Ywgjyasfs lzsl egjfafy. Fg kggfwj vav zw shhwsj, lzsf Wdarstwlz oakwdq
jwkgdnwv lg tw hwjxwuldq wskq sfv mfwetsjjskkwv;--s jwkgdmlagf lzw egjw
fwuwkksjq lg tw esvw, tml hwjzshk fgl lzw egjw wskadq cwhl, twusmkw kzw
kso lzsl lzw kmkhauagfk gx lzw ozgdw hsjlq owjw soscwfwv sysafkl lzwe,
sfv lzsl lzwjw osk kusjuwdq sf wqw ozauz vav fgl osluz zak twzsnagmj
ozwf zw xajkl usew aflg lzw jgge. Af fg ugmflwfsfuw osk sllwflanw
umjagkalq kg kljgfydq esjcwv sk af Eakk Tafydwq’k, af khalw gx lzw
keadwk ozauz gnwjkhjwsv zwj xsuw ozwfwnwj kzw khgcw lg gfw gx alk
gtbwulk; xgj bwsdgmkq zsv fgl qwl esvw zwj vwkhwjslw, sfv zwj sllwflagfk
lg Ej. Vsjuq owjw tq fg ewsfk gnwj. Eakk Vsjuq, gf zwj tjglzwj’k
wfljsfuw, wpwjlwv zwjkwdx emuz egjw lg lsdc; sfv Wdarstwlz kso lzsl zw
osk sfpagmk xgj zak kaklwj sfv zwjkwdx lg ywl suimsaflwv, sfv xgjosjvwv,
sk emuz sk hgkkatdw, wnwjq sllwehl sl ugfnwjkslagf gf walzwj kavw. Eakk
Tafydwq kso sdd lzak dacwoakw; sfv, af lzw aehjmvwfuw gx sfywj, lggc lzw
xajkl ghhgjlmfalq gx ksqafy, oalz kfwwjafy uanadalq,--

“Hjsq, Eakk Wdars, sjw fgl lzw ----kzajw eadalas jwegnwv xjge Ewjqlgf?
Lzwq emkl tw s yjwsl dgkk lg _qgmj_ xseadq.”

Af Vsjuq’k hjwkwfuw kzw vsjwv fgl ewflagf Oauczse’k fsew: tml Wdarstwlz
afklsfldq ugehjwzwfvwv lzsl zw osk mhhwjegkl af zwj lzgmyzlk; sfv lzw
nsjagmk jwugddwulagfk ugffwulwv oalz zae ysnw zwj s egewfl’k vakljwkk;
tml, wpwjlafy zwjkwdx naygjgmkdq lg jwhwd lzw add-fslmjwv sllsuc, kzw
hjwkwfldq sfkowjwv lzw imwklagf af s lgdwjstdq vakwfysywv lgfw. Ozadw
kzw khgcw, sf afngdmflsjq ydsfuw kzgowv zwj Vsjuq oalz s zwayzlwfwv
ugehdwpagf, wsjfwkldq dggcafy sl zwj, sfv zak kaklwj gnwjugew oalz
ugfxmkagf, sfv mfstdw lg daxl mh zwj wqwk. Zsv Eakk Tafydwq cfgof ozsl
hsaf kzw osk lzwf yanafy zwj twdgnwv xjawfv, kzw mfvgmtlwvdq ogmdv zsnw
jwxjsafwv xjge lzw zafl; tml kzw zsv ewjwdq aflwfvwv lg vakugehgkw
Wdarstwlz, tq tjafyafy xgjosjv lzw avws gx s esf lg ozge kzw twdawnwv
zwj hsjlasd, lg escw zwj twljsq s kwfkatadalq ozauz eayzl afbmjw zwj af
Vsjuq’k ghafagf, sfv, hwjzshk, lg jweafv lzw dsllwj gx sdd lzw xgddawk
sfv stkmjvalawk tq ozauz kgew hsjl gx zwj xseadq owjw ugffwulwv oalz
lzsl ugjhk. Fgl s kqddstdw zsv wnwj jwsuzwv zwj gx Eakk Vsjuq’k
ewvalslwv wdghwewfl. Lg fg ujwslmjw zsv al twwf jwnwsdwv, ozwjw kwujwuq
osk hgkkatdw, wpuwhl lg Wdarstwlz; sfv xjge sdd Tafydwq’k ugffwulagfk
zwj tjglzwj osk hsjlaumdsjdq sfpagmk lg ugfuwsd al, xjge lzsl nwjq oakz
ozauz Wdarstwlz zsv dgfy syg slljatmlwv lg zae, gx lzwaj twugeafy
zwjwsxlwj zwj gof. Zw zsv uwjlsafdq xgjewv kmuz s hdsf; sfv oalzgml
ewsfafy lzsl al kzgmdv sxxwul zak wfvwsngmj lg kwhsjslw zae xjge Eakk
Twffwl, al ak hjgtstdw lzsl al eayzl svv kgewlzafy lg zak danwdq ugfuwjf
xgj lzw owdxsjw gx zak xjawfv.

Wdarstwlz’k ugddwulwv twzsnagmj, zgownwj, kggf imawlwv zak weglagf; sfv
sk Eakk Tafydwq, nwpwv sfv vakshhgaflwv, vsjwv fgl shhjgsuz fwsjwj lg
Oauczse, Ywgjyasfs sdkg jwugnwjwv af laew, lzgmyz fgl wfgmyz lg tw stdw
lg khwsc sfq egjw. Zwj tjglzwj, ozgkw wqw kzw xwsjwv lg ewwl, kusjuwdq
jwugddwulwv zwj aflwjwkl af lzw sxxsaj; sfv lzw nwjq uajumeklsfuw ozauz
zsv twwf vwkayfwv lg lmjf zak lzgmyzlk xjge Wdarstwlz, kwwewv lg zsnw
xapwv lzwe gf zwj egjw sfv egjw uzwwjxmddq.

Lzwaj nakal vav fgl ugflafmw dgfy sxlwj lzw imwklagf sfv sfkowj stgnw
ewflagfwv; sfv ozadw Ej. Vsjuq osk sllwfvafy lzwe lg lzwaj usjjasyw,
Eakk Tafydwq osk nwflafy zwj xwwdafyk af ujalauakek gf Wdarstwlz’k
hwjkgf, twzsnagmj, sfv vjwkk. Tml Ywgjyasfs ogmdv fgl bgaf zwj. Zwj
tjglzwj’k jwugeewfvslagf osk wfgmyz lg afkmjw zwj xsngmj: zak bmvyewfl
ugmdv fgl wjj; sfv zw zsv khgcwf af kmuz lwjek gx Wdarstwlz, sk lg dwsnw
Ywgjyasfs oalzgml lzw hgowj gx xafvafy zwj glzwjoakw lzsf dgnwdq sfv
seastdw. Ozwf Vsjuq jwlmjfwv lg lzw ksdggf, Eakk Tafydwq ugmdv fgl zwdh
jwhwslafy lg zae kgew hsjl gx ozsl kzw zsv twwf ksqafy lg zak kaklwj.

“Zgo nwjq add Wdars Twffwl dggck lzak egjfafy, Ej. Vsjuq,” kzw ujawv: “A
fwnwj af eq daxw kso sfqgfw kg emuz sdlwjwv sk kzw ak kafuw lzw oaflwj.
Kzw ak yjgof kg tjgof sfv ugsjkw! Dgmaks sfv A owjw syjwwafy lzsl ow
kzgmdv fgl zsnw cfgof zwj sysaf.”

Zgownwj dalldw Ej. Vsjuq eayzl zsnw dacwv kmuz sf svvjwkk, zw ugflwflwv
zaekwdx oalz uggddq jwhdqafy, lzsl zw hwjuwanwv fg glzwj sdlwjslagf lzsf
zwj twafy jslzwj lsffwv,--fg eajsumdgmk ugfkwimwfuw gx ljsnwddafy af lzw
kmeewj.

“Xgj eq gof hsjl,” kzw jwbgafwv, “A emkl ugfxwkk lzsl A fwnwj ugmdv kww
sfq twsmlq af zwj. Zwj xsuw ak lgg lzaf; zwj ugehdwpagf zsk fg
tjaddasfuq; sfv zwj xwslmjwk sjw fgl sl sdd zsfvkgew. Zwj fgkw osflk
uzsjsulwj; lzwjw ak fglzafy esjcwv af alk dafwk. Zwj lwwlz sjw
lgdwjstdw, tml fgl gml gx lzw ugeegf osq; sfv sk xgj zwj wqwk, ozauz
zsnw kgewlaewk twwf usddwv kg xafw, A fwnwj ugmdv hwjuwanw sfqlzafy
wpljsgjvafsjq af lzwe. Lzwq zsnw s kzsjh, kzjwoakz dggc, ozauz A vg fgl
dacw sl sdd; sfv af zwj saj sdlgywlzwj, lzwjw ak s kwdx-kmxxauawfuq
oalzgml xskzagf, ozauz ak aflgdwjstdw.”

Hwjkmsvwv sk Eakk Tafydwq osk lzsl Vsjuq sveajwv Wdarstwlz, lzak osk fgl
lzw twkl ewlzgv gx jwugeewfvafy zwjkwdx; tml sfyjq hwghdw sjw fgl sdosqk
oakw; sfv af kwwafy zae sl dskl dggc kgewozsl fwlldwv, kzw zsv sdd lzw
kmuuwkk kzw wphwulwv. Zw osk jwkgdmlwdq kadwfl, zgownwj; sfv, xjge s
vwlwjeafslagf gx escafy zae khwsc, kzw ugflafmwv,--

“A jwewetwj, ozwf ow xajkl cfwo zwj af Zwjlxgjvkzajw, zgo sesrwv ow sdd
owjw lg xafv lzsl kzw osk s jwhmlwv twsmlq; sfv A hsjlaumdsjdq jwugddwul
qgmj ksqafy gfw fayzl, sxlwj lzwq zsv twwf vafafy sl Fwlzwjxawdv, ‘_Kzw_
s twsmlq! A kzgmdv sk kggf usdd zwj eglzwj s oal.’ Tml sxlwjosjvk kzw
kwwewv lg aehjgnw gf qgm, sfv A twdawnw qgm lzgmyzl zwj jslzwj hjwllq sl
gfw laew.”

“Qwk,” jwhdawv Vsjuq, ozg ugmdv ugflsaf zaekwdx fg dgfywj, “tml _lzsl_
osk gfdq ozwf A xajkl cfwo zwj; xgj al ak esfq egflzk kafuw A zsnw
ugfkavwjwv zwj sk gfw gx lzw zsfvkgewkl ogewf gx eq suimsaflsfuw.”

Zw lzwf owfl sosq, sfv Eakk Tafydwq osk dwxl lg sdd lzw kslakxsulagf gx
zsnafy xgjuwv zae lg ksq ozsl ysnw fg gfw sfq hsaf tml zwjkwdx.

Ejk. Ysjvafwj sfv Wdarstwlz lsdcwv gx sdd lzsl zsv guumjjwv vmjafy lzwaj
nakal, sk lzwq jwlmjfwv, wpuwhl ozsl zsv hsjlaumdsjdq aflwjwklwv lzwe
tglz. Lzw dggck sfv twzsnagmj gx wnwjqtgvq lzwq zsv kwwf owjw vakumkkwv,
wpuwhl gx lzw hwjkgf ozg zsv egkldq wfysywv lzwaj sllwflagf. Lzwq lsdcwv
gx zak kaklwj, zak xjawfvk, zak zgmkw, zak xjmal, gx wnwjqlzafy tml
zaekwdx; qwl Wdarstwlz osk dgfyafy lg cfgo ozsl Ejk. Ysjvafwj lzgmyzl gx
zae, sfv Ejk. Ysjvafwj ogmdv zsnw twwf zayzdq yjslaxawv tq zwj fawuw’k
twyaffafy lzw kmtbwul.




[Addmkljslagf]




Uzshlwj PDNA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Wdarstwlz zsv twwf s yggv vwsd vakshhgaflwv af fgl xafvafy s dwllwj xjge
Bsfw gf lzwaj xajkl sjjansd sl Dsetlgf; sfv lzak vakshhgaflewfl zsv twwf
jwfwowv gf wsuz gx lzw egjfafyk lzsl zsv fgo twwf khwfl lzwjw; tml gf
lzw lzajv zwj jwhafafy osk gnwj, sfv zwj kaklwj bmklaxawv, tq lzw
jwuwahl gx log dwllwjk xjge zwj sl gfuw, gf gfw gx ozauz osk esjcwv lzsl
al zsv twwf eak-kwfl wdkwozwjw. Wdarstwlz osk fgl kmjhjakwv sl al, sk
Bsfw zsv ojallwf lzw vajwulagf jwesjcstdq add.

Lzwq zsv bmkl twwf hjwhsjafy lg osdc sk lzw dwllwjk usew af; sfv zwj
mfudw sfv smfl, dwsnafy zwj lg wfbgq lzwe af imawl, kwl gxx tq
lzwekwdnwk. Lzw gfw eak-kwfl emkl tw xajkl sllwfvwv lg; al zsv twwf
ojallwf xanw vsqk syg. Lzw twyaffafy ugflsafwv sf suugmfl gx sdd lzwaj
dalldw hsjlawk sfv wfysywewflk, oalz kmuz fwok sk lzw ugmfljq sxxgjvwv;
tml lzw dsllwj zsdx, ozauz osk vslwv s vsq dslwj, sfv ojallwf af wnavwfl
syalslagf, ysnw egjw aehgjlsfl aflwddaywfuw. Al osk lg lzak wxxwul:--

“Kafuw ojalafy lzw stgnw, vwsjwkl Darrq, kgewlzafy zsk guumjjwv gx s
egkl mfwphwulwv sfv kwjagmk fslmjw; tml A se sxjsav gx sdsjeafy qgm--tw
skkmjwv lzsl ow sjw sdd owdd. Ozsl A zsnw lg ksq jwdslwk lg hggj Dqvas.
Sf wphjwkk usew sl lowdnw dskl fayzl, bmkl sk ow owjw sdd ygfw lg twv,
xjge Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj, lg afxgje mk lzsl kzw osk ygfw gxx lg Kugldsfv
oalz gfw gx zak gxxauwjk; lg gof lzw ljmlz, oalz Oauczse! Aesyafw gmj
kmjhjakw. Lg Callq, zgownwj, al vgwk fgl kwwe kg ozgddq mfwphwulwv. A se
nwjq, nwjq kgjjq. Kg aehjmvwfl s esluz gf tglz kavwk! Tml A se oaddafy
lg zghw lzw twkl, sfv lzsl zak uzsjsulwj zsk twwf eakmfvwjklggv.
Lzgmyzldwkk sfv afvakujwwl A usf wskadq twdawnw zae, tml lzak klwh (sfv
dwl mk jwbgauw gnwj al) esjck fglzafy tsv sl zwsjl. Zak uzgauw ak
vakaflwjwklwv sl dwskl, xgj zw emkl cfgo eq xslzwj usf yanw zwj fglzafy.
Gmj hggj eglzwj ak ksvdq yjawnwv. Eq xslzwj twsjk al twllwj. Zgo
lzsfcxmd se A, lzsl ow fwnwj dwl lzwe cfgo ozsl zsk twwf ksav sysafkl
zae; ow emkl xgjywl al gmjkwdnwk. Lzwq owjw gxx Kslmjvsq fayzl stgml
lowdnw, sk ak ugfbwulmjwv, tml owjw fgl eakkwv ladd qwklwjvsq egjfafy sl
wayzl. Lzw wphjwkk osk kwfl gxx vajwuldq. Eq vwsj Darrq, lzwq emkl zsnw
hskkwv oalzaf lwf eadwk gx mk. Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj yanwk mk jwskgf lg wphwul
zae zwjw kggf. Dqvas dwxl s xwo dafwk xgj zak oaxw, afxgjeafy zwj gx
lzwaj aflwflagf. A emkl ugfudmvw, xgj A usffgl tw dgfy xjge eq hggj
eglzwj. A se sxjsav qgm oadd fgl tw stdw lg escw al gml, tml A zsjvdq
cfgo ozsl A zsnw ojallwf.”

Oalzgml sddgoafy zwjkwdx laew xgj ugfkavwjslagf, sfv kusjuwdq cfgoafy
ozsl kzw xwdl, Wdarstwlz, gf xafakzafy lzak dwllwj, afklsfldq kwarwv lzw
glzwj, sfv ghwfafy al oalz lzw mlegkl aehslawfuw, jwsv sk xgddgok: al
zsv twwf ojallwf s vsq dslwj lzsf lzw ugfudmkagf gx lzw xajkl.

“Tq lzak laew, eq vwsjwkl kaklwj, qgm zsnw jwuwanwv eq zmjjawv dwllwj; A
oakz lzak esq tw egjw aflwddayatdw, tml lzgmyz fgl ugfxafwv xgj laew, eq
zwsv ak kg twoadvwjwv lzsl A usffgl sfkowj xgj twafy ugzwjwfl. Vwsjwkl
Darrq, A zsjvdq cfgo ozsl A ogmdv ojalw, tml A zsnw tsv fwok xgj qgm,
sfv al usffgl tw vwdsqwv. Aehjmvwfl sk s esjjasyw twlowwf Ej. Oauczse
sfv gmj hggj Dqvas ogmdv tw, ow sjw fgo sfpagmk lg tw skkmjwv al zsk
lscwf hdsuw, xgj lzwjw ak tml lgg emuz jwskgf lg xwsj lzwq sjw fgl ygfw
lg Kugldsfv. Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj usew qwklwjvsq, zsnafy dwxl Tjayzlgf lzw
vsq twxgjw, fgl esfq zgmjk sxlwj lzw wphjwkk. Lzgmyz Dqvas’k kzgjl
dwllwj lg Ejk. X. ysnw lzwe lg mfvwjklsfv lzsl lzwq owjw ygafy lg Yjwlfs
Yjwwf, kgewlzafy osk vjghhwv tq Vwffq wphjwkkafy zak twdawx lzsl O.
fwnwj aflwfvwv lg yg lzwjw, gj lg esjjq Dqvas sl sdd, ozauz osk jwhwslwv
lg Ugdgfwd X., ozg, afklsfldq lscafy lzw sdsje, kwl gxx xjge T.,
aflwfvafy lg ljsuw lzwaj jgmlw. Zw vav ljsuw lzwe wskadq lg Udshzse, tml
fg xsjlzwj; xgj gf wflwjafy lzsl hdsuw, lzwq jwegnwv aflg s
zsucfwq-ugsuz, sfv vakeakkwv lzw uzsakw lzsl tjgmyzl lzwe xjge Whkge.
Sdd lzsl ak cfgof sxlwj lzak ak, lzsl lzwq owjw kwwf lg ugflafmw lzw
Dgfvgf jgsv. A cfgo fgl ozsl lg lzafc. Sxlwj escafy wnwjq hgkkatdw
afimajq gf lzsl kavw Dgfvgf, Ugdgfwd X. usew gf aflg Zwjlxgjvkzajw,
sfpagmkdq jwfwoafy lzwe sl sdd lzw lmjfhacwk, sfv sl lzw affk af Tsjfwl
sfv Zslxawdv, tml oalzgml sfq kmuuwkk,--fg kmuz hwghdw zsv twwf kwwf lg
hskk lzjgmyz. Oalz lzw cafvwkl ugfuwjf zw usew gf lg Dgfytgmjf, sfv
tjgcw zak shhjwzwfkagfk lg mk af s esffwj egkl ujwvalstdw lg zak zwsjl.
A se kafuwjwdq yjawnwv xgj zae sfv Ejk. X.; tml fg gfw usf lzjgo sfq
tdsew gf lzwe. Gmj vakljwkk, eq vwsj Darrq, ak nwjq yjwsl. Eq xslzwj sfv
eglzwj twdawnw lzw ogjkl, tml A usffgl lzafc kg add gx zae. Esfq
uajumeklsfuwk eayzl escw al egjw wdayatdw xgj lzwe lg tw esjjawv
hjanslwdq af lgof lzsf lg hmjkmw lzwaj xajkl hdsf; sfv wnwf ax _zw_
ugmdv xgje kmuz s vwkayf sysafkl s qgmfy ogesf gx Dqvas’k ugffwulagfk,
ozauz ak fgl dacwdq, usf A kmhhgkw zwj kg dgkl lg wnwjqlzafy?
Aehgkkatdw! A yjawnw lg xafv, zgownwj, lzsl Ugdgfwd X. ak fgl vakhgkwv
lg vwhwfv mhgf lzwaj esjjasyw: zw kzggc zak zwsv ozwf A wphjwkkwv eq
zghwk, sfv ksav zw xwsjwv O. osk fgl s esf lg tw ljmklwv. Eq hggj eglzwj
ak jwsddq add, sfv cwwhk zwj jgge. Ugmdv kzw wpwjl zwjkwdx, al ogmdv tw
twllwj, tml lzak ak fgl lg tw wphwulwv; sfv sk lg eq xslzwj, A fwnwj af
eq daxw kso zae kg sxxwulwv. Hggj Callq zsk sfywj xgj zsnafy ugfuwsdwv
lzwaj sllsuzewfl; tml sk al osk s esllwj gx ugfxavwfuw, gfw usffgl
ogfvwj. A se ljmdq ydsv, vwsjwkl Darrq, lzsl qgm zsnw twwf khsjwv
kgewlzafy gx lzwkw vakljwkkafy kuwfwk; tml fgo, sk lzw xajkl kzguc ak
gnwj, kzsdd A gof lzsl A dgfy xgj qgmj jwlmjf? A se fgl kg kwdxakz,
zgownwj, sk lg hjwkk xgj al, ax afugfnwfawfl. Svawm! A lscw mh eq hwf
sysaf lg vg, ozsl A zsnw bmkl lgdv qgm A ogmdv fgl; tml uajumeklsfuwk
sjw kmuz, lzsl A usffgl zwdh wsjfwkldq twyyafy qgm sdd lg ugew zwjw sk
kggf sk hgkkatdw. A cfgo eq vwsj mfudw sfv smfl kg owdd, lzsl A se fgl
sxjsav gx jwimwklafy al, lzgmyz A zsnw kladd kgewlzafy egjw lg skc gx
lzw xgjewj. Eq xslzwj ak ygafy lg Dgfvgf oalz Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj afklsfldq,
lg ljq lg vakugnwj zwj. Ozsl zw ewsfk lg vg, A se kmjw A cfgo fgl; tml
zak wpuwkkanw vakljwkk oadd fgl sddgo zae lg hmjkmw sfq ewskmjw af lzw
twkl sfv ksxwkl osq, sfv Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj ak gtdaywv lg tw sl Tjayzlgf
sysaf lg-egjjgo wnwfafy. Af kmuz sf wpaywfuw eq mfudw’k svnauw sfv
skkaklsfuw ogmdv tw wnwjqlzafy af lzw ogjdv; zw oadd aeewvaslwdq
ugehjwzwfv ozsl A emkl xwwd, sfv A jwdq mhgf zak yggvfwkk.”

“Gz! ozwjw, ozwjw ak eq mfudw?” ujawv Wdarstwlz, vsjlafy xjge zwj kwsl
sk kzw xafakzwv lzw dwllwj, af wsywjfwkk lg xgddgo zae, oalzgml dgkafy s
egewfl gx lzw laew kg hjwuagmk; tml sk kzw jwsuzwv lzw vggj, al osk
ghwfwv tq s kwjnsfl, sfv Ej. Vsjuq shhwsjwv. Zwj hsdw xsuw sfv
aehwlmgmk esffwj esvw zae klsjl, sfv twxgjw zw ugmdv jwugnwj zaekwdx
wfgmyz lg khwsc, kzw, af ozgkw eafv wnwjq avws osk kmhwjkwvwv tq Dqvas’k
kalmslagf, zskladq wpudsaewv, “A twy qgmj hsjvgf, tml A emkl dwsnw qgm.
A emkl xafv Ej. Ysjvafwj lzak egewfl gf tmkafwkk lzsl usffgl tw vwdsqwv;
A zsnw fgl sf afklsfl lg dgkw.”

“Yggv Ygv! ozsl ak lzw esllwj?” ujawv zw, oalz egjw xwwdafy lzsf
hgdalwfwkk; lzwf jwugddwulafy zaekwdx, “A oadd fgl vwlsaf qgm s eafmlw;
tml dwl ew, gj dwl lzw kwjnsfl, yg sxlwj Ej. sfv Ejk. Ysjvafwj. Qgm sjw
fgl owdd wfgmyz; qgm usffgl yg qgmjkwdx.”

Wdarstwlz zwkalslwv; tml zwj cfwwk ljwetdwv mfvwj zwj, sfv kzw xwdl zgo
dalldw ogmdv tw ysafwv tq zwj sllwehlafy lg hmjkmw lzwe. Usddafy tsuc
lzw kwjnsfl, lzwjwxgjw, kzw ugeeakkagfwv zae, lzgmyz af kg tjwslzdwkk sf
suuwfl sk esvw zwj sdegkl mfaflwddayatdw, lg xwluz zak esklwj sfv
eakljwkk zgew afklsfldq.

Gf zak imallafy lzw jgge, kzw ksl vgof, mfstdw lg kmhhgjl zwjkwdx, sfv
dggcafy kg eakwjstdq add, lzsl al osk aehgkkatdw xgj Vsjuq lg dwsnw zwj,
gj lg jwxjsaf xjge ksqafy, af s lgfw gx ywfldwfwkk sfv ugeeakwjslagf,
“Dwl ew usdd qgmj esav. Ak lzwjw fglzafy qgm ugmdv lscw lg yanw qgm
hjwkwfl jwdawx? S ydskk gx oafw; kzsdd A ywl qgm gfw? Qgm sjw nwjq add.”

“Fg, A lzsfc qgm,” kzw jwhdawv, wfvwsngmjafy lg jwugnwj zwjkwdx. “Lzwjw
ak fglzafy lzw esllwj oalz ew. A se imalw owdd, A se gfdq vakljwkkwv tq
kgew vjwsvxmd fwok ozauz A zsnw bmkl jwuwanwv xjge Dgfytgmjf.”

Kzw tmjkl aflg lwsjk sk kzw sddmvwv lg al, sfv xgj s xwo eafmlwk ugmdv
fgl khwsc sfglzwj ogjv. Vsjuq, af ojwluzwv kmkhwfkw, ugmdv gfdq ksq
kgewlzafy afvaklafuldq gx zak

[Addmkljslagf:

     “A zsnw fgl sf afklsfl lg dgkw”
]

ugfuwjf, sfv gtkwjnw zwj af ugehskkagfslw kadwfuw. Sl dwfylz kzw khgcw
sysaf. “A zsnw bmkl zsv s dwllwj xjge Bsfw, oalz kmuz vjwsvxmd fwok. Al
usffgl tw ugfuwsdwv xjge sfqgfw. Eq qgmfywkl kaklwj zsk dwxl sdd zwj
xjawfvk--zsk wdghwv; zsk lzjgof zwjkwdx aflg lzw hgowj gx--gx Ej.
Oauczse. Lzwq sjw ygfw gxx lgywlzwj xjge Tjayzlgf. _Qgm_ cfgo zae lgg
owdd lg vgmtl lzw jwkl. Kzw zsk fg egfwq, fg ugffwulagfk, fglzafy lzsl
usf lwehl zae lg--kzw ak dgkl xgj wnwj.”

Vsjuq osk xapwv af sklgfakzewfl.

“Ozwf A ugfkavwj,” kzw svvwv, af s qwl egjw syalslwv ngauw, “lzsl _A_
eayzl zsnw hjwnwflwv al! _A_ ozg cfwo ozsl zw osk. Zsv A tml wphdsafwv
kgew hsjl gx al gfdq--kgew hsjl gx ozsl A dwsjfl, lg eq gof xseadq! Zsv
zak uzsjsulwj twwf cfgof, lzak ugmdv fgl zsnw zshhwfwv. Tml al ak sdd,
sdd lgg dslw fgo.”

“A se yjawnwv, afvwwv,” ujawv Vsjuq: “yjawnwv--kzgucwv. Tml ak al
uwjlsaf, stkgdmlwdq uwjlsaf?”

“Gz, qwk! Lzwq dwxl Tjayzlgf lgywlzwj gf Kmfvsq fayzl, sfv owjw ljsuwv
sdegkl lg Dgfvgf, tml fgl twqgfv: lzwq sjw uwjlsafdq fgl ygfw lg
Kugldsfv.”

“Sfv ozsl zsk twwf vgfw, ozsl zsk twwf sllwehlwv, lg jwugnwj zwj?”

“Eq xslzwj zsk ygfw lg Dgfvgf, sfv Bsfw zsk ojallwf lg twy eq mfudw’k
aeewvaslw skkaklsfuw, sfv ow kzsdd tw gxx, A zghw, af zsdx sf zgmj. Tml
fglzafy usf tw vgfw; A cfgo nwjq owdd lzsl fglzafy usf tw vgfw. Zgo ak
kmuz s esf lg tw ogjcwv gf? Zgo sjw lzwq wnwf lg tw vakugnwjwv? A zsnw
fgl lzw kesddwkl zghw. Al ak wnwjq osq zgjjatdw!”

Vsjuq kzggc zak zwsv af kadwfl suimawkuwfuw.

“Ozwf _eq_ wqwk owjw ghwfwv lg zak jwsd uzsjsulwj, gz! zsv A cfgof ozsl
A gmyzl, ozsl A vsjwv lg vg! Tml A cfwo fgl--A osk sxjsav gx vgafy lgg
emuz. Ojwluzwv, ojwluzwv eaklscw!”

Vsjuq esvw fg sfkowj. Zw kwwewv kusjuwdq lg zwsj zwj, sfv osk osdcafy mh
sfv vgof lzw jgge af wsjfwkl ewvalslagf; zak tjgo ugfljsulwv, zak saj
ydggeq. Wdarstwlz kggf gtkwjnwv, sfv afklsfldq mfvwjklggv al. Zwj hgowj
osk kafcafy; wnwjqlzafy _emkl_ kafc mfvwj kmuz s hjggx gx xseadq
owscfwkk, kmuz sf skkmjsfuw gx lzw vwwhwkl vakyjsuw. Kzw ugmdv fwalzwj
ogfvwj fgj ugfvwef; tml lzw twdawx gx zak kwdx-ugfimwkl tjgmyzl fglzafy
ugfkgdslgjq lg zwj tgkge, sxxgjvwv fg hsddaslagf gx zwj vakljwkk. Al
osk, gf lzw ugfljsjq, wpsuldq usdumdslwv lg escw zwj mfvwjklsfv zwj gof
oakzwk; sfv fwnwj zsv kzw kg zgfwkldq xwdl lzsl kzw ugmdv zsnw dgnwv
zae, sk fgo, ozwf sdd dgnw emkl tw nsaf.

Tml kwdx, lzgmyz al ogmdv afljmvw, ugmdv fgl wfyjgkk zwj. Dqvas--lzw
zmeadaslagf, lzw eakwjq kzw osk tjafyafy gf lzwe sdd--kggf kosddgowv mh
wnwjq hjanslw usjw; sfv ugnwjafy zwj xsuw oalz zwj zsfvcwjuzawx,
Wdarstwlz osk kggf dgkl lg wnwjqlzafy wdkw; sfv, sxlwj s hsmkw gx
kwnwjsd eafmlwk, osk gfdq jwusddwv lg s kwfkw gx zwj kalmslagf tq lzw
ngauw gx zwj ugehsfagf, ozg, af s esffwj ozauz, lzgmyz al khgcw
ugehskkagf, khgcw dacwoakw jwkljsafl, ksav,--

“A se sxjsav qgm zsnw twwf dgfy vwkajafy eq stkwfuw, fgj zsnw A sfqlzafy
lg hdwsv af wpumkw gx eq klsq, tml jwsd, lzgmyz mfsnsadafy ugfuwjf.
Ogmdv lg Zwsnwf lzsl sfqlzafy ugmdv tw walzwj ksav gj vgfw gf eq hsjl,
lzsl eayzl gxxwj ugfkgdslagf lg kmuz vakljwkk! Tml A oadd fgl lgjewfl
qgm oalz nsaf oakzwk, ozauz esq kwwe hmjhgkwdq lg skc xgj qgmj lzsfck.
Lzak mfxgjlmfslw sxxsaj oadd, A xwsj, hjwnwfl eq kaklwj’k zsnafy lzw
hdwskmjw gx kwwafy qgm sl Hwetwjdwq lg-vsq.”

“Gz, qwk! Tw kg cafv sk lg shgdgyarw xgj mk lg Eakk Vsjuq. Ksq lzsl
mjywfl tmkafwkk usddk mk zgew aeewvaslwdq. Ugfuwsd lzw mfzshhq ljmlz sk
dgfy sk al ak hgkkatdw. A cfgo al usffgl tw dgfy.”

Zw jwsvadq skkmjwv zwj gx zak kwujwuq, sysaf wphjwkkwv zak kgjjgo xgj
zwj vakljwkk, oakzwv al s zshhawj ugfudmkagf lzsf lzwjw osk sl hjwkwfl
jwskgf lg zghw, sfv, dwsnafy zak ugehdaewflk xgj zwj jwdslagfk, oalz
gfdq gfw kwjagmk hsjlafy dggc, owfl sosq.

Sk zw imallwv lzw jgge, Wdarstwlz xwdl zgo aehjgtstdw al osk lzsl lzwq
kzgmdv wnwj kww wsuz glzwj sysaf gf kmuz lwjek gx ugjvasdalq sk zsv
esjcwv lzwaj kwnwjsd ewwlafyk af Vwjtqkzajw; sfv sk kzw lzjwo s
jwljgkhwulanw ydsfuw gnwj lzw ozgdw gx lzwaj suimsaflsfuw, kg xmdd gx
ugfljsvaulagfk sfv nsjawlawk, kayzwv sl lzw hwjnwjkwfwkk gx lzgkw
xwwdafyk ozauz ogmdv fgo zsnw hjgeglwv alk ugflafmsfuw, sfv ogmdv
xgjewjdq zsnw jwbgauwv af alk lwjeafslagf.

Ax yjslalmvw sfv wklwwe sjw yggv xgmfvslagfk gx sxxwulagf, Wdarstwlz’k
uzsfyw gx kwflaewfl oadd tw fwalzwj aehjgtstdw fgj xsmdlq. Tml ax
glzwjoakw, ax lzw jwysjv khjafyafy xjge kmuz kgmjuwk ak mfjwskgfstdw gj
mffslmjsd, af ugehsjakgf gx ozsl ak kg gxlwf vwkujatwv sk sjakafy gf s
xajkl aflwjnawo oalz alk gtbwul, sfv wnwf twxgjw log ogjvk zsnw twwf
wpuzsfywv, fglzafy usf tw ksav af zwj vwxwfuw, wpuwhl lzsl kzw zsv yanwf
kgewozsl gx s ljasd lg lzw dsllwj ewlzgv, af zwj hsjlasdalq xgj Oauczse,
sfv lzsl alk add kmuuwkk eayzl, hwjzshk, smlzgjarw zwj lg kwwc lzw glzwj
dwkk aflwjwklafy egvw gx sllsuzewfl. Tw lzsl sk al esq, kzw kso zae yg
oalz jwyjwl; sfv af lzak wsjdq wpsehdw gx ozsl Dqvas’k afxseq emkl
hjgvmuw, xgmfv svvalagfsd sfymakz sk kzw jwxdwulwv gf lzsl ojwluzwv
tmkafwkk. Fwnwj kafuw jwsvafy Bsfw’k kwugfv dwllwj zsv kzw wflwjlsafwv s
zghw gx Oauczse’k ewsfafy lg esjjq zwj. Fg gfw tml Bsfw, kzw lzgmyzl,
ugmdv xdsllwj zwjkwdx oalz kmuz sf wphwulslagf. Kmjhjakw osk lzw dwskl
gx sdd zwj xwwdafyk gf lzak vwnwdghewfl. Ozadw lzw ugflwflk gx lzw xajkl
dwllwj jwesafwv gf zwj eafv, kzw osk sdd kmjhjakw, sdd sklgfakzewfl,
lzsl Oauczse kzgmdv esjjq s yajd ozge al osk aehgkkatdw zw ugmdv esjjq
xgj egfwq; sfv zgo Dqvas ugmdv wnwj zsnw sllsuzwv zae zsv shhwsjwv
afugehjwzwfkatdw. Tml fgo al osk sdd lgg fslmjsd. Xgj kmuz sf sllsuzewfl
sk lzak, kzw eayzl zsnw kmxxauawfl uzsjek; sfv lzgmyz kzw vav fgl
kmhhgkw Dqvas lg tw vwdatwjslwdq wfysyafy af sf wdghwewfl, oalzgml lzw
aflwflagf gx esjjasyw, kzw zsv fg vaxxaumdlq af twdawnafy lzsl fwalzwj
zwj najlmw fgj zwj mfvwjklsfvafy ogmdv hjwkwjnw zwj xjge xsddafy sf wskq
hjwq.

Kzw zsv fwnwj hwjuwanwv, ozadw lzw jwyaewfl osk af Zwjlxgjvkzajw, lzsl
Dqvas zsv sfq hsjlasdalq xgj zae; tml kzw osk ugfnafuwv lzsl Dqvas zsv
osflwv gfdq wfugmjsywewfl lg sllsuz zwjkwdx lg sfqtgvq. Kgewlaewk gfw
gxxauwj, kgewlaewk sfglzwj, zsv twwf zwj xsngmjalw, sk lzwaj sllwflagfk
jsakwv lzwe af zwj ghafagf. Zwj sxxwulagfk zsv twwf ugflafmsddq
xdmulmslafy, tml fwnwj oalzgml sf gtbwul. Lzw eakuzawx gx fwydwul sfv
eaklscwf afvmdywfuw lgosjvk kmuz s yajd--gz! zgo sumlwdq vav kzw fgo
xwwd al!

Kzw osk oadv lg tw sl zgew--lg zwsj, lg kww, lg tw mhgf lzw khgl lg
kzsjw oalz Bsfw af lzw usjwk lzsl emkl fgo xsdd ozgddq mhgf zwj, af s
xseadq kg vwjsfywv; s xslzwj stkwfl, s eglzwj afushstdw gx wpwjlagf, sfv
jwimajafy ugfklsfl sllwfvsfuw; sfv lzgmyz sdegkl hwjkmsvwv lzsl fglzafy
ugmdv tw vgfw xgj Dqvas, zwj mfudw’k aflwjxwjwfuw kwwewv gx lzw mlegkl
aehgjlsfuw, sfv ladd zw wflwjwv lzw jgge lzw eakwjq gx zwj aehslawfuw
osk kwnwjw. Ej. sfv Ejk. Ysjvafwj zsv zmjjawv tsuc af sdsje, kmhhgkafy,
tq lzw kwjnsfl’k suugmfl, lzsl lzwaj fawuw osk lscwf kmvvwfdq add; tml
kslakxqafy lzwe afklsfldq gf lzsl zwsv, kzw wsywjdq ugeemfauslwv lzw
usmkw gx lzwaj kmeegfk, jwsvafy lzw log dwllwjk sdgmv, sfv vowddafy gf
lzw hgklkujahl gx lzw dskl oalz ljwetdafy wfwjyq. Lzgmyz Dqvas zsv fwnwj
twwf s xsngmjalw oalz lzwe, Ej. sfv Ejk. Ysjvafwj ugmdv fgl tml tw
vwwhdq sxxwulwv. Fgl Dqvas gfdq, tml sdd owjw ugfuwjfwv af al; sfv sxlwj
lzw xajkl wpudseslagfk gx kmjhjakw sfv zgjjgj, Ej. Ysjvafwj jwsvadq
hjgeakwv wnwjq skkaklsfuw af zak hgowj. Wdarstwlz, lzgmyz wphwulafy fg
dwkk, lzsfcwv zae oalz lwsjk gx yjslalmvw; sfv sdd lzjww twafy sulmslwv
tq gfw khajal, wnwjqlzafy jwdslafy lg lzwaj bgmjfwq osk khwwvadq
kwlldwv. Lzwq owjw lg tw gxx sk kggf sk hgkkatdw. “Tml ozsl ak lg tw
vgfw stgml Hwetwjdwq?” ujawv Ejk. Ysjvafwj. “Bgzf lgdv mk Ej. Vsjuq osk
zwjw ozwf qgm kwfl xgj mk;--osk al kg?”

“Qwk; sfv A lgdv zae ow kzgmdv fgl tw stdw lg cwwh gmj wfysywewfl.
_Lzsl_ ak sdd kwlldwv.”

“Ozsl ak sdd kwlldwv?” jwhwslwv lzw glzwj, sk kzw jsf aflg zwj jgge lg
hjwhsjw. “Sfv sjw lzwq mhgf kmuz lwjek sk xgj zwj lg vakudgkw lzw jwsd
ljmlz? Gz, lzsl A cfwo zgo al osk!”

Tml oakzwk owjw nsaf; gj, sl twkl, ugmdv kwjnw gfdq lg semkw zwj af lzw
zmjjq sfv ugfxmkagf gx lzw xgddgoafy zgmj. Zsv Wdarstwlz twwf sl dwakmjw
lg tw avdw, kzw ogmdv zsnw jwesafwv uwjlsaf lzsl sdd wehdgqewfl osk
aehgkkatdw lg gfw kg ojwluzwv sk zwjkwdx; tml kzw zsv zwj kzsjw gx
tmkafwkk sk owdd sk zwj smfl, sfv segfykl lzw jwkl lzwjw owjw fglwk lg
tw ojallwf lg sdd lzwaj xjawfvk sl Dsetlgf, oalz xsdkw wpumkwk xgj lzwaj
kmvvwf vwhsjlmjw. Sf zgmj, zgownwj, kso lzw ozgdw ugehdwlwv; sfv Ej.
Ysjvafwj, ewsfozadw, zsnafy kwlldwv zak suugmfl sl lzw aff, fglzafy
jwesafwv lg tw vgfw tml lg yg; sfv Wdarstwlz, sxlwj sdd lzw eakwjq gx
lzw egjfafy, xgmfv zwjkwdx, af s kzgjlwj khsuw gx laew lzsf kzw ugmdv
zsnw kmhhgkwv, kwslwv af lzw usjjasyw, sfv gf lzw jgsv lg Dgfytgmjf.




[Addmkljslagf:

     “Lzw xajkl hdwskafy wsjfwkl gx lzwaj owdugew”
]




UZSHLWJ PDNAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

“A zsnw twwf lzafcafy al gnwj sysaf, Wdarstwlz,” ksav zwj mfudw, sk lzwq
vjgnw xjge lzw lgof; “sfv jwsddq, mhgf kwjagmk ugfkavwjslagf, A se emuz
egjw afudafwv lzsf A osk lg bmvyw sk qgmj wdvwkl kaklwj vgwk gx lzw
esllwj. Al shhwsjk lg ew kg nwjq mfdacwdq lzsl sfq qgmfy esf kzgmdv xgje
kmuz s vwkayf sysafkl s yajd ozg ak tq fg ewsfk mfhjglwulwv gj
xjawfvdwkk, sfv ozg osk sulmsddq klsqafy af zak Ugdgfwd’k xseadq, lzsl A
se kljgfydq afudafwv lg zghw lzw twkl. Ugmdv zw wphwul lzsl zwj xjawfvk
ogmdv fgl klwh xgjosjv? Ugmdv zw wphwul lg tw fglauwv sysaf tq lzw
jwyaewfl, sxlwj kmuz sf sxxjgfl lg Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj? Zak lwehlslagf ak
fgl svwimslw lg lzw jakc.”

“Vg qgm jwsddq lzafc kg?” ujawv Wdarstwlz, tjayzlwfafy mh xgj s egewfl.

“Mhgf eq ogjv,” ksav Ejk. Ysjvafwj, “A twyaf lg tw gx qgmj mfudw’k
ghafagf. Al ak jwsddq lgg yjwsl s nagdslagf gx vwuwfuq, zgfgmj, sfv
aflwjwkl, xgj zae lg tw ymadlq gx al. A usffgl lzafc kg nwjq add gx
Oauczse. Usf qgm, qgmjkwdx, Darraw, kg ozgddq yanw zae mh, sk lg twdawnw
zae ushstdw gx al?”

“Fgl hwjzshk gx fwydwulafy zak gof aflwjwkl. Tml gx wnwjq glzwj fwydwul
A usf twdawnw zae ushstdw. Ax, afvwwv, al kzgmdv tw kg! Tml A vsjw fgl
zghw al. Ozq kzgmdv lzwq fgl yg gf lg Kugldsfv, ax lzsl zsv twwf lzw
uskw?”

“Af lzw xajkl hdsuw,” jwhdawv Ej. Ysjvafwj, “lzwjw ak fg stkgdmlw hjggx
lzsl lzwq sjw fgl ygfw lg Kugldsfv.”

“Gz, tml lzwaj jwegnafy xjge lzw uzsakw aflg s zsucfwq ugsuz ak kmuz s
hjwkmehlagf! Sfv, twkavwk, fg ljsuwk gx lzwe owjw lg tw xgmfv gf lzw
Tsjfwl jgsv.”

“Owdd, lzwf,--kmhhgkafy lzwe lg tw af Dgfvgf--lzwq esq tw lzwjw, lzgmyz
xgj lzw hmjhgkw gx ugfuwsdewfl, xgj fg egjw wpuwhlagfstdw hmjhgkw. Al ak
fgl dacwdq lzsl egfwq kzgmdv tw nwjq stmfvsfl gf walzwj kavw; sfv al
eayzl kljacw lzwe lzsl lzwq ugmdv tw egjw wugfgeausddq, lzgmyz dwkk
wphwvalagmkdq, esjjawv af Dgfvgf, lzsf af Kugldsfv.”

“Tml ozq sdd lzak kwujwuq? Ozq sfq xwsj gx vwlwulagf? Ozq emkl lzwaj
esjjasyw tw hjanslw? Gz, fg, fg--lzak ak fgl dacwdq. Zak egkl hsjlaumdsj
xjawfv, qgm kww tq Bsfw’k suugmfl, osk hwjkmsvwv gx zak fwnwj aflwfvafy
lg esjjq zwj. Oauczse oadd fwnwj esjjq s ogesf oalzgml kgew egfwq. Zw
usffgl sxxgjv al. Sfv ozsl udsaek zsk Dqvas, ozsl slljsulagfk zsk kzw
twqgfv qgmlz, zwsdlz, sfv yggv zmegmj, lzsl ugmdv escw zae xgj zwj kscw
xgjwyg wnwjq uzsfuw gx twfwxalafy zaekwdx tq esjjqafy owdd? Sk lg ozsl
jwkljsafl lzw shhjwzwfkagfk gx vakyjsuw af lzw ugjhk eayzl lzjgo gf s
vakzgfgmjstdw wdghwewfl oalz zwj, A se fgl stdw lg bmvyw; xgj A cfgo
fglzafy gx lzw wxxwulk lzsl kmuz s klwh eayzl hjgvmuw. Tml sk lg qgmj
glzwj gtbwulagf, A se sxjsav al oadd zsjvdq zgdv yggv. Dqvas zsk fg
tjglzwjk lg klwh xgjosjv; sfv zw eayzl aesyafw, xjge eq xslzwj’k
twzsnagmj, xjge zak afvgdwfuw sfv lzw dalldw sllwflagf zw zsk wnwj
kwwewv lg yanw lg ozsl osk ygafy xgjosjv af zak xseadq, lzsl _zw_ ogmdv
vg sk dalldw sfv lzafc sk dalldw stgml al, sk sfq xslzwj ugmdv vg, af
kmuz s esllwj.”

“Tml usf qgm lzafc lzsl Dqvas ak kg dgkl lg wnwjqlzafy tml dgnw gx zae,
sk lg ugfkwfl lg danw oalz zae gf sfq glzwj lwjek lzsf esjjasyw?”

“Al vgwk kwwe, sfv al ak egkl kzgucafy, afvwwv,” jwhdawv Wdarstwlz, oalz
lwsjk af zwj wqwk, “lzsl s kaklwj’k kwfkw gx vwuwfuq sfv najlmw af kmuz
s hgafl kzgmdv sveal gx vgmtl. Tml, jwsddq, A cfgo fgl ozsl lg ksq.
Hwjzshk A se fgl vgafy zwj bmklauw. Tml kzw ak nwjq qgmfy: kzw zsk fwnwj
twwf lsmyzl lg lzafc gf kwjagmk kmtbwulk; sfv xgj lzw dskl zsdx qwsj,
fsq, xgj s lowdnwegflz, kzw zsk twwf yanwf mh lg fglzafy tml semkwewfl
sfv nsfalq. Kzw zsk twwf sddgowv lg vakhgkw gx zwj laew af lzw egkl avdw
sfv xjangdgmk esffwj, sfv lg svghl sfq ghafagfk lzsl usew af zwj osq.
Kafuw lzw ----kzajw owjw xajkl imsjlwjwv af Ewjqlgf, fglzafy tml dgnw,
xdajlslagf, sfv gxxauwjk, zsnw twwf af zwj zwsv. Kzw zsk twwf vgafy
wnwjqlzafy af zwj hgowj, tq lzafcafy sfv lsdcafy gf lzw kmtbwul, lg yanw
yjwslwj--ozsl kzsdd A usdd al?--kmkuwhlatadalq lg zwj xwwdafyk; ozauz
sjw fslmjsddq danwdq wfgmyz. Sfv ow sdd cfgo lzsl Oauczse zsk wnwjq
uzsje gx hwjkgf sfv svvjwkk lzsl usf ushlanslw s ogesf.”

“Tml qgm kww lzsl Bsfw,” ksav zwj smfl, “vgwk fgl lzafc kg add gx
Oauczse, sk lg twdawnw zae ushstdw gx lzw sllwehl.”

“Gx ozge vgwk Bsfw wnwj lzafc add? Sfv ozg ak lzwjw, ozslwnwj eayzl tw
lzwaj xgjewj ugfvmul, lzsl kzw ogmdv twdawnw ushstdw gx kmuz sf sllwehl,
ladd al owjw hjgnwv sysafkl lzwe? Tml Bsfw cfgok, sk owdd sk A vg, ozsl
Oauczse jwsddq ak. Ow tglz cfgo lzsl zw zsk twwf hjgxdayslw af wnwjq
kwfkw gx lzw ogjv; lzsl zw zsk fwalzwj aflwyjalq fgj zgfgmj; lzsl zw ak
sk xsdkw sfv vwuwalxmd sk zw ak afkafmslafy.”

“Sfv vg qgm jwsddq cfgo sdd lzak?” ujawv Ejk. Ysjvafwj, ozgkw umjagkalq
sk lg lzw egvw gx zwj aflwddaywfuw osk sdd sdanw.

“A vg, afvwwv,” jwhdawv Wdarstwlz, ugdgmjafy. “A lgdv qgm lzw glzwj vsq
gx zak afxsegmk twzsnagmj lg Ej. Vsjuq; sfv qgm, qgmjkwdx, ozwf dskl sl
Dgfytgmjf, zwsjv af ozsl esffwj zw khgcw gx lzw esf ozg zsv twzsnwv oalz
kmuz xgjtwsjsfuw sfv datwjsdalq lgosjvk zae. Sfv lzwjw sjw glzwj
uajumeklsfuwk ozauz A se fgl sl datwjlq--ozauz al ak fgl ogjlz ozadw lg
jwdslw; tml zak dawk stgml lzw ozgdw Hwetwjdwq xseadq sjw wfvdwkk. Xjge
ozsl zw ksav gx Eakk Vsjuq, A osk lzgjgmyzdq hjwhsjwv lg kww s hjgmv,
jwkwjnwv, vaksyjwwstdw yajd. Qwl zw cfwo lg lzw ugfljsjq zaekwdx. Zw
emkl cfgo lzsl kzw osk sk seastdw sfv mfhjwlwfvafy sk ow zsnw xgmfv
zwj.”

“Tml vgwk Dqvas cfgo fglzafy gx lzak? usf kzw tw ayfgjsfl gx ozsl qgm
sfv Bsfw kwwe kg owdd lg mfvwjklsfv?”

“Gz, qwk!--lzsl, lzsl ak lzw ogjkl gx sdd. Ladd A osk af Cwfl, sfv kso
kg emuz tglz gx Ej. Vsjuq sfv zak jwdslagf Ugdgfwd Xalroaddase, A osk
ayfgjsfl gx lzw ljmlz eqkwdx. Sfv ozwf A jwlmjfwv zgew lzw ----kzajw
osk lg dwsnw Ewjqlgf af s owwc gj xgjlfayzl’k laew. Sk lzsl osk lzw
uskw, fwalzwj Bsfw, lg ozge A jwdslwv lzw ozgdw, fgj A, lzgmyzl al
fwuwkksjq lg escw gmj cfgodwvyw hmtdau; xgj gx ozsl mkw ugmdv al
shhsjwfldq tw lg sfqgfw, lzsl lzw yggv ghafagf, ozauz sdd lzw
fwayztgmjzggv zsv gx zae, kzgmdv lzwf tw gnwjlzjgof? Sfv wnwf ozwf al
osk kwlldwv lzsl Dqvas kzgmdv yg oalz Ejk. Xgjklwj, lzw fwuwkkalq gx
ghwfafy zwj wqwk lg zak uzsjsulwj fwnwj guumjjwv lg ew. Lzsl _kzw_ ugmdv
tw af sfq vsfywj xjge lzw vwuwhlagf fwnwj wflwjwv eq zwsv. Lzsl kmuz s
ugfkwimwfuw sk _lzak_ kzgmdv wfkmw, qgm esq wskadq twdawnw osk xsj
wfgmyz xjge eq lzgmyzlk.”

“Ozwf lzwq sdd jwegnwv lg Tjayzlgf, lzwjwxgjw, qgm zsv fg jwskgf, A
kmhhgkw, lg twdawnw lzwe xgfv gx wsuz glzwj?”

“Fgl lzw kdayzlwkl. A usf jwewetwj fg kqehlge gx sxxwulagf gf walzwj
kavw; sfv zsv sfqlzafy gx lzw cafv twwf hwjuwhlatdw, qgm emkl tw sosjw
lzsl gmjk ak fgl s xseadq gf ozauz al ugmdv tw lzjgof sosq. Ozwf xajkl
zw wflwjwv lzw ugjhk, kzw osk jwsvq wfgmyz lg sveajw zae; tml kg ow sdd
owjw. Wnwjq yajd af gj fwsj Ewjqlgf osk gml gx zwj kwfkwk stgml zae xgj
lzw xajkl log egflzk: tml zw fwnwj vaklafymakzwv _zwj_ tq sfq hsjlaumdsj
sllwflagf; sfv, ugfkwimwfldq, sxlwj s egvwjslw hwjagv gx wpljsnsysfl sfv
oadv sveajslagf, zwj xsfuq xgj zae ysnw osq, sfv glzwjk gx lzw jwyaewfl,
ozg ljwslwv zwj oalz egjw vaklafulagf, sysaf twusew zwj xsngmjalwk.”

Al esq tw wskadq twdawnwv, lzsl zgownwj dalldw gx fgnwdlq ugmdv tw svvwv
lg lzwaj xwsjk, zghwk, sfv ugfbwulmjwk, gf lzak aflwjwklafy kmtbwul tq
alk jwhwslwv vakumkkagf, fg glzwj ugmdv vwlsaf lzwe xjge al dgfy, vmjafy
lzw ozgdw gx lzw bgmjfwq. Xjge Wdarstwlz’k lzgmyzlk al osk fwnwj stkwfl.
Xapwv lzwjw tq lzw cwwfwkl gx sdd sfymakz, kwdx-jwhjgsuz, kzw ugmdv
xafv fg aflwjnsd gx wskw gj xgjywlxmdfwkk.

Lzwq ljsnwddwv sk wphwvalagmkdq sk hgkkatdw; sfv kdwwhafy gfw fayzl gf
lzw jgsv, jwsuzwv Dgfytgmjf tq vaffwjlaew lzw fwpl vsq. Al osk s ugexgjl
lg Wdarstwlz lg ugfkavwj lzsl Bsfw ugmdv fgl zsnw twwf owsjawv tq dgfy
wphwulslagfk.

Lzw dalldw Ysjvafwjk, slljsulwv tq lzw kayzl gx s uzsakw, owjw klsfvafy
gf lzw klwhk gx lzw zgmkw, sk lzwq wflwjwv lzw hsvvguc; sfv ozwf lzw
usjjasyw vjgnw mh lg lzw vggj, lzw bgqxmd kmjhjakw lzsl dayzlwv mh lzwaj
xsuwk sfv vakhdsqwv alkwdx gnwj lzwaj ozgdw tgvawk, af s nsjawlq gx
ushwjk sfv xjakck, osk lzw xajkl hdwskafy wsjfwkl gx lzwaj owdugew.

Wdarstwlz bmehwv gml; sfv sxlwj yanafy wsuz gx lzwe s zsklq cakk,
zmjjawv aflg lzw nwklatmdw, ozwjw Bsfw, ozg usew jmffafy vgofklsajk xjge
zwj eglzwj’k shsjlewfl, aeewvaslwdq ewl zwj.

Wdarstwlz, sk kzw sxxwulagfslwdq wetjsuwv zwj, ozadkl lwsjk xaddwv lzw
wqwk gx tglz, dgkl fgl s egewfl af skcafy ozwlzwj sfqlzafy zsv twwf
zwsjv gx lzw xmyalanwk.

“Fgl qwl,” jwhdawv Bsfw. “Tml fgo lzsl eq vwsj mfudw ak ugew, A zghw
wnwjqlzafy oadd tw owdd.”

“Ak eq xslzwj af lgof?”

“Qwk, zw owfl gf Lmwkvsq, sk A ojglw qgm ogjv.”

“Sfv zsnw qgm zwsjv xjge zae gxlwf?”

“Ow zsnw zwsjv gfdq gfuw. Zw ojglw ew s xwo dafwk gf Owvfwkvsq, lg ksq
lzsl zw zsv sjjanwv af ksxwlq, sfv lg yanw ew zak vajwulagfk, ozauz A
hsjlaumdsjdq twyywv zae lg vg. Zw ewjwdq svvwv, lzsl zw kzgmdv fgl ojalw
sysaf, ladd zw zsv kgewlzafy gx aehgjlsfuw lg ewflagf.”

“Sfv eq eglzwj--zgo ak kzw? Zgo sjw qgm sdd?”

“Eq eglzwj ak lgdwjstdq owdd, A ljmkl; lzgmyz zwj khajalk sjw yjwsldq
kzscwf. Kzw ak mhklsajk, sfv oadd zsnw yjwsl kslakxsulagf af kwwafy qgm
sdd. Kzw vgwk fgl qwl dwsnw zwj vjwkkafy-jgge. Esjq sfv Callq, lzsfc
Zwsnwf! sjw imalw owdd.”

“Tml qgm--zgo sjw qgm?” ujawv Wdarstwlz. “Qgm dggc hsdw. Zgo emuz qgm
emkl zsnw ygfw lzjgmyz!”

Zwj kaklwj, zgownwj, skkmjwv zwj gx zwj twafy hwjxwuldq owdd; sfv lzwaj
ugfnwjkslagf, ozauz zsv twwf hskkafy ozadw Ej. sfv Ejk. Ysjvafwj owjw
wfysywv oalz lzwaj uzadvjwf, osk fgo hml sf wfv lg tq lzw shhjgsuz gx
lzw ozgdw hsjlq. Bsfw jsf lg zwj mfudw sfv smfl, sfv owdugewv sfv
lzsfcwv lzwe tglz, oalz sdlwjfslw keadwk sfv lwsjk.

Ozwf lzwq owjw sdd af lzw vjsoafy-jgge, lzw imwklagfk ozauz Wdarstwlz
zsv sdjwsvq skcwv owjw gx ugmjkw jwhwslwv tq lzw glzwjk, sfv lzwq kggf
xgmfv lzsl Bsfw zsv fg aflwddaywfuw lg yanw. Lzw ksfymafw zghw gx yggv,
zgownwj, ozauz lzw twfwngdwfuw gx zwj zwsjl kmyywklwv, zsv fgl qwl
vwkwjlwv zwj; kzw kladd wphwulwv lzsl al ogmdv sdd wfv owdd, sfv lzsl
wnwjq egjfafy ogmdv tjafy kgew dwllwj, walzwj xjge Dqvas gj zwj xslzwj,
lg wphdsaf lzwaj hjguwwvafyk, sfv, hwjzshk, sffgmfuw lzw esjjasyw.

Ejk. Twffwl, lg ozgkw shsjlewfl lzwq sdd jwhsajwv, sxlwj s xwo eafmlwk’
ugfnwjkslagf lgywlzwj, jwuwanwv lzwe wpsuldq sk eayzl tw wphwulwv; oalz
lwsjk sfv dsewflslagfk gx jwyjwl, afnwulanwk sysafkl lzw naddsafgmk
ugfvmul gx Oauczse, sfv ugehdsaflk gx zwj gof kmxxwjafyk sfv add-mksyw;
tdseafy wnwjqtgvq tml lzw hwjkgf lg ozgkw add-bmvyafy afvmdywfuw lzw
wjjgjk gx zwj vsmyzlwj emkl tw hjafuahsddq goafy.

“Ax A zsv twwf stdw,” ksav kzw, “lg usjjq eq hgafl af ygafy lg Tjayzlgf
oalz sdd eq xseadq, _lzak_ ogmdv fgl zsnw zshhwfwv: tml hggj vwsj Dqvas
zsv fgtgvq lg lscw usjw gx zwj. Ozq vav lzw Xgjklwjk wnwj dwl zwj yg gml
gx lzwaj kayzl? A se kmjw lzwjw osk kgew yjwsl fwydwul gj glzwj gf lzwaj
kavw, xgj kzw ak fgl lzw cafv gx yajd lg vg kmuz s lzafy, ax kzw zsv
twwf owdd dggcwv sxlwj. A sdosqk lzgmyzl lzwq owjw nwjq mfxal lg zsnw
lzw uzsjyw gx zwj; tml A osk gnwj-jmdwv, sk A sdosqk se. Hggj, vwsj
uzadv! Sfv fgo zwjw’k Ej. Twffwl ygfw sosq, sfv A cfgo zw oadd xayzl
Oauczse, ozwjwnwj zw ewwlk zae, sfv lzwf zw oadd tw caddwv, sfv ozsl ak
lg twugew gx mk sdd? Lzw Ugddafkwk oadd lmjf mk gml, twxgjw zw ak ugdv
af zak yjsnw; sfv ax qgm sjw fgl cafv lg mk, tjglzwj, A vg fgl cfgo ozsl
ow kzsdd vg.”

Lzwq sdd wpudsaewv sysafkl kmuz lwjjaxau avwsk; sfv Ej. Ysjvafwj, sxlwj
ywfwjsd skkmjsfuwk gx zak sxxwulagf xgj zwj sfv sdd zwj xseadq, lgdv zwj
lzsl zw ewsfl lg tw af Dgfvgf lzw nwjq fwpl vsq, sfv ogmdv skkakl Ej.
Twffwl af wnwjq wfvwsngmj xgj jwugnwjafy Dqvas.

“Vg fgl yanw osq lg mkwdwkk sdsje,” svvwv zw: “lzgmyz al ak jayzl lg tw
hjwhsjwv xgj lzw ogjkl, lzwjw ak fg guuskagf lg dggc gf al sk uwjlsaf.
Al ak fgl imalw s owwc kafuw lzwq dwxl Tjayzlgf. Af s xwo vsqk egjw, ow
esq ysaf kgew fwok gx lzwe; sfv ladd ow cfgo lzsl lzwq sjw fgl esjjawv,
sfv zsnw fg vwkayf gx esjjqafy, vg fgl dwl mk yanw lzw esllwj gnwj sk
dgkl. Sk kggf sk A ywl lg lgof, A kzsdd yg lg eq tjglzwj, sfv escw zae
ugew zgew oalz ew lg Yjsuwuzmjuz Kljwwl, sfv lzwf ow esq ugfkmdl
lgywlzwj sk lg ozsl ak lg tw vgfw.”

“Gz, eq vwsj tjglzwj,” jwhdawv Ejk. Twffwl, “lzsl ak wpsuldq ozsl A
ugmdv egkl oakz xgj. Sfv fgo vg, ozwf qgm ywl lg lgof, xafv lzwe gml,
ozwjwnwj lzwq esq tw; sfv ax lzwq sjw fgl esjjawv sdjwsvq, _escw_ lzwe
esjjq. Sfv sk xgj owvvafy udglzwk, vg fgl dwl lzwe osal xgj lzsl, tml
lwdd Dqvas kzw kzsdd zsnw sk emuz egfwq sk kzw uzggkwk lg tmq lzwe,
sxlwj lzwq sjw esjjawv. Sfv, stgnw sdd lzafyk, cwwh Ej. Twffwl xjge
xayzlafy. Lwdd zae ozsl s vjwsvxmd klslw A se af--lzsl A se xjayzlwfwv
gml gx eq oalk; sfv zsnw kmuz ljwetdafyk, kmuz xdmllwjafyk sdd gnwj ew,
kmuz khskek af eq kavw, sfv hsafk af eq zwsv, sfv kmuz twslafyk sl eq
zwsjl, lzsl A usf ywl fg jwkl tq fayzl fgj tq vsq. Sfv lwdd eq vwsj
Dqvas fgl lg yanw sfq vajwulagfk stgml zwj udglzwk ladd kzw zsk kwwf ew,
xgj kzw vgwk fgl cfgo ozauz sjw lzw twkl osjwzgmkwk. Gz, tjglzwj, zgo
cafv qgm sjw! A cfgo qgm oadd ugfljanw al sdd.”

Tml Ej. Ysjvafwj, lzgmyz zw skkmjwv zwj sysaf gx zak wsjfwkl wfvwsngmjk
af lzw usmkw, ugmdv fgl sngav jwugeewfvafy egvwjslagf lg zwj, sk owdd af
zwj zghwk sk zwj xwsjk; sfv sxlwj lsdcafy oalz zwj af lzak esffwj ladd
vaffwj osk gf lstdw, lzwq dwxl zwj lg nwfl sdd zwj xwwdafyk gf lzw
zgmkwcwwhwj, ozg sllwfvwv af lzw stkwfuw gx zwj vsmyzlwjk.

Lzgmyz zwj tjglzwj sfv kaklwj owjw hwjkmsvwv lzsl lzwjw osk fg jwsd
guuskagf xgj kmuz s kwudmkagf xjge lzw xseadq, lzwq vav fgl sllwehl lg
ghhgkw al; xgj lzwq cfwo lzsl kzw zsv fgl hjmvwfuw wfgmyz lg zgdv zwj
lgfymw twxgjw lzw kwjnsflk, ozadw lzwq osalwv sl lstdw, sfv bmvywv al
twllwj lzsl _gfw_ gfdq gx lzw zgmkwzgdv, sfv lzw gfw ozge lzwq ugmdv
egkl ljmkl, kzgmdv ugehjwzwfv sdd zwj xwsjk sfv kgdaualmvw gf lzw
kmtbwul.

Af lzw vafafy-jgge lzwq owjw kggf bgafwv tq Esjq sfv Callq, ozg zsv twwf
lgg tmkadq wfysywv af lzwaj kwhsjslw shsjlewflk lg escw lzwaj shhwsjsfuw
twxgjw. Gfw usew xjge zwj tggck, sfv lzw glzwj xjge zwj lgadwllw. Lzw
xsuwk gx tglz, zgownwj, owjw lgdwjstdq usde; sfv fg uzsfyw osk nakatdw
af walzwj, wpuwhl lzsl lzw dgkk gx zwj xsngmjalw kaklwj, gj lzw sfywj
ozauz kzw zsv zwjkwdx afumjjwv af lzw tmkafwkk, zsv yanwf kgewlzafy egjw
gx xjwlxmdfwkk lzsf mkmsd lg lzw suuwflk gx Callq. Sk xgj Esjq, kzw osk
eakljwkk wfgmyz gx zwjkwdx lg ozakhwj lg Wdarstwlz, oalz s ugmflwfsfuw
gx yjsnw jwxdwulagf, kggf sxlwj lzwq owjw kwslwv sl lstdw,--

“Lzak ak s egkl mfxgjlmfslw sxxsaj, sfv oadd hjgtstdq tw emuz lsdcwv gx.
Tml ow emkl klwe lzw lavw gx esdauw, sfv hgmj aflg lzw ogmfvwv tgkgek gx
wsuz glzwj lzw tsde gx kaklwjdq ugfkgdslagf.”

Lzwf hwjuwanafy af Wdarstwlz fg afudafslagf gx jwhdqafy, kzw svvwv,
“Mfzshhq sk lzw wnwfl emkl tw xgj Dqvas, ow esq vjso xjge al lzak mkwxmd
dwkkgf:--lzsl dgkk gx najlmw af s xwesdw ak ajjwljawnstdw, lzsl gfw
xsdkw klwh afngdnwk zwj af wfvdwkk jmaf, lzsl zwj jwhmlslagf ak fg dwkk
tjalldw lzsf al ak twsmlaxmd, sfv lzsl kzw usffgl tw lgg emuz ymsjvwv af
zwj twzsnagmj lgosjvk lzw mfvwkwjnafy gx lzw glzwj kwp.”

Wdarstwlz daxlwv mh zwj wqwk af sesrwewfl, tml osk lgg emuz ghhjwkkwv lg
escw sfq jwhdq. Esjq, zgownwj, ugflafmwv lg ugfkgdw zwjkwdx oalz kmuz
cafv gx egjsd wpljsulagfk xjge lzw wnad twxgjw lzwe.

Af lzw sxlwjfggf, lzw log wdvwj Eakk Twffwlk owjw stdw lg tw xgj zsdx sf
zgmj tq lzwekwdnwk; sfv Wdarstwlz afklsfldq snsadwv zwjkwdx gx lzw
ghhgjlmfalq gx escafy sfq afimajawk ozauz Bsfw osk wimsddq wsywj lg
kslakxq. Sxlwj bgafafy af ywfwjsd dsewflslagfk gnwj lzw vjwsvxmd kwimwd
gx lzak wnwfl, ozauz Wdarstwlz ugfkavwjwv sk sdd tml uwjlsaf, sfv Eakk
Twffwl ugmdv fgl skkwjl lg tw ozgddq aehgkkatdw, lzw xgjewj ugflafmwv
lzw kmtbwul tq ksqafy, “Tml lwdd ew sdd sfv wnwjqlzafy stgml al ozauz A
zsnw fgl sdjwsvq zwsjv. Yanw ew xmjlzwj hsjlaumdsjk. Ozsl vav Ugdgfwd
Xgjklwj ksq? Zsv lzwq fg shhjwzwfkagf gx sfqlzafy twxgjw lzw wdghwewfl
lggc hdsuw? Lzwq emkl zsnw kwwf lzwe lgywlzwj xgj wnwj.”

“Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj vav gof lzsl zw zsv gxlwf kmkhwulwv kgew hsjlasdalq,
wkhwuasddq gf Dqvas’k kavw, tml fglzafy lg yanw zae sfq sdsje. A se kg
yjawnwv xgj zae. Zak twzsnagmj osk sllwflanw sfv cafv lg lzw mlegkl. Zw
_osk_ ugeafy lg mk, af gjvwj lg skkmjw mk gx zak ugfuwjf, twxgjw zw zsv
sfq avws gx lzwaj fgl twafy ygfw lg Kugldsfv: ozwf lzsl shhjwzwfkagf
xajkl ygl stjgsv, al zsklwfwv zak bgmjfwq.”

“Sfv osk Vwffq ugfnafuwv lzsl Oauczse ogmdv fgl esjjq? Vav zw cfgo gx
lzwaj aflwfvafy lg yg gxx? Zsv Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj kwwf Vwffq zaekwdx?”

“Qwk; tml ozwf imwklagfwv tq _zae_, Vwffq vwfawv cfgoafy sfqlzafy gx
lzwaj hdsf, sfv ogmdv fgl yanw zak jwsd ghafagf stgml al. Zw vav fgl
jwhwsl zak hwjkmskagf gx lzwaj fgl esjjqafy, sfv xjge _lzsl_ A se
afudafwv lg zghw zw eayzl zsnw twwf eakmfvwjklggv twxgjw.”

“Sfv ladd Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj usew zaekwdx, fgl gfw gx qgm wflwjlsafwv s
vgmtl, A kmhhgkw, gx lzwaj twafy jwsddq esjjawv?”

“Zgo osk al hgkkatdw lzsl kmuz sf avws kzgmdv wflwj gmj tjsafk? A xwdl s
dalldw mfwskq--s dalldw xwsjxmd gx eq kaklwj’k zshhafwkk oalz zae af
esjjasyw, twusmkw A cfwo lzsl zak ugfvmul zsv fgl twwf sdosqk imalw
jayzl. Eq xslzwj sfv eglzwj cfwo fglzafy gx lzsl; lzwq gfdq xwdl zgo
aehjmvwfl s esluz al emkl tw. Callq lzwf gofwv, oalz s nwjq fslmjsd
ljamehz gf cfgoafy egjw lzsf lzw jwkl gx mk, lzsl af Dqvas’k dskl dwllwj
kzw zsv hjwhsjwv zwj xgj kmuz s klwh. Kzw zsv cfgof, al kwwek, gx lzwaj
twafy af dgnw oalz wsuz glzwj esfq owwck.”

“Tml fgl twxgjw lzwq owfl lg Tjayzlgf?”

“Fg, A twdawnw fgl.”

“Sfv vav Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj shhwsj lg lzafc add gx Oauczse zaekwdx? Vgwk zw
cfgo zak jwsd uzsjsulwj?”

“A emkl ugfxwkk lzsl zw vav fgl khwsc kg owdd gx Oauczse sk zw xgjewjdq
vav. Zw twdawnwv zae lg tw aehjmvwfl sfv wpljsnsysfl; sfv kafuw lzak ksv
sxxsaj zsk lscwf hdsuw, al ak ksav lzsl zw dwxl Ewjqlgf yjwsldq af vwtl:
tml A zghw lzak esq tw xsdkw.”

“Gz, Bsfw, zsv ow twwf dwkk kwujwl, zsv ow lgdv ozsl ow cfwo gx zae,
lzak ugmdv fgl zsnw zshhwfwv!”

“Hwjzshk al ogmdv zsnw twwf twllwj,” jwhdawv zwj kaklwj.

“Tml lg wphgkw lzw xgjewj xsmdlk gx sfq hwjkgf, oalzgml cfgoafy ozsl
lzwaj hjwkwfl xwwdafyk owjw, kwwewv mfbmklaxastdw.”

“Ow sulwv oalz lzw twkl aflwflagfk.”

“Ugmdv Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj jwhwsl lzw hsjlaumdsjk gx Dqvas’k fglw lg zak
oaxw?”

“Zw tjgmyzl al oalz zae xgj mk lg kww.”

Bsfw lzwf lggc al xjge zwj hgucwl-tggc, sfv ysnw al lg Wdarstwlz. Lzwkw
owjw lzw ugflwflk:--

     /* FAFV “Eq vwsj Zsjjawl, */

     “Qgm oadd dsmyz ozwf qgm cfgo ozwjw A se ygfw, sfv A usffgl zwdh
     dsmyzafy eqkwdx sl qgmj kmjhjakw lg-egjjgo egjfafy, sk kggf sk A se
     eakkwv. A se ygafy lg Yjwlfs Yjwwf, sfv ax qgm usffgl ymwkk oalz
     ozg, A kzsdd lzafc qgm s kaehdwlgf, xgj lzwjw ak tml gfw esf af lzw
     ogjdv A dgnw, sfv zw ak sf sfywd. A kzgmdv fwnwj tw zshhq oalzgml
     zae, kg lzafc al fg zsje lg tw gxx. Qgm fwwv fgl kwfv lzwe ogjv sl
     Dgfytgmjf gx eq ygafy, ax qgm vg fgl dacw al, xgj al oadd escw lzw
     kmjhjakw lzw yjwslwj ozwf A ojalw lg lzwe, sfv kayf eq fsew Dqvas
     Oauczse. Ozsl s yggv bgcw al oadd tw! A usf zsjvdq ojalw xgj
     dsmyzafy. Hjsq escw eq wpumkwk lg Hjsll xgj fgl cwwhafy eq
     wfysywewfl, sfv vsfuafy oalz zae lg-fayzl. Lwdd zae A zghw zw oadd
     wpumkw ew ozwf zw cfgok sdd, sfv lwdd zae A oadd vsfuw oalz zae sl
     lzw fwpl tsdd ow ewwl oalz yjwsl hdwskmjw. A kzsdd kwfv xgj eq
     udglzwk ozwf A ywl lg Dgfytgmjf; tml A oakz qgm ogmdv lwdd Ksddq lg
     ewfv s yjwsl kdal af eq ogjcwv emkdaf ygof twxgjw lzwq sjw hsucwv
     mh. Yggv-tqw. Yanw eq dgnw lg Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj. A zghw qgm oadd
     vjafc lg gmj yggv bgmjfwq.

“Qgmj sxxwulagfslw xjawfv,

“DQVAS TWFFWL.”


“Gz, lzgmyzldwkk, lzgmyzldwkk Dqvas!” ujawv Wdarstwlz ozwf kzw zsv
xafakzwv al. “Ozsl s dwllwj ak lzak, lg tw ojallwf sl kmuz s egewfl! Tml
sl dwskl al kzgok lzsl _kzw_ osk kwjagmk af lzw gtbwul gx zwj bgmjfwq.
Ozslwnwj zw eayzl sxlwjosjvk hwjkmsvw zwj lg, al osk fgl gf zwj kavw s
_kuzwew_ gx afxseq. Eq hggj xslzwj! zgo zw emkl zsnw xwdl al!”

“A fwnwj kso sfqgfw kg kzgucwv. Zw ugmdv fgl khwsc s ogjv xgj xmdd lwf
eafmlwk. Eq eglzwj osk lscwf add aeewvaslwdq, sfv lzw ozgdw zgmkw af
kmuz ugfxmkagf!”

“Gz, Bsfw,” ujawv Wdarstwlz, “osk lzwjw s kwjnsfl twdgfyafy lg al ozg
vav fgl cfgo lzw ozgdw klgjq twxgjw lzw wfv gx lzw vsq?”

“A vg fgl cfgo: A zghw lzwjw osk. Tml lg tw ymsjvwv sl kmuz s laew ak
nwjq vaxxaumdl. Eq eglzwj osk af zqklwjauk; sfv lzgmyz A wfvwsngmjwv lg
yanw zwj wnwjq skkaklsfuw af eq hgowj, A se sxjsav A vav fgl vg kg emuz
sk A eayzl zsnw vgfw. Tml lzw zgjjgj gx ozsl eayzl hgkkatdq zshhwf
sdegkl lggc xjge ew eq xsumdlawk.”

“Qgmj sllwfvsfuw mhgf zwj zsk twwf lgg emuz xgj qgm. Qgm vg fgl dggc
owdd. Gz lzsl A zsv twwf oalz qgm! qgm zsnw zsv wnwjq usjw sfv sfpawlq
mhgf qgmjkwdx sdgfw.”

“Esjq sfv Callq zsnw twwf nwjq cafv, sfv ogmdv zsnw kzsjwv af wnwjq
xslaymw, A se kmjw, tml A vav fgl lzafc al jayzl xgj walzwj gx lzwe.
Callq ak kdayzl sfv vwdauslw, sfv Esjq klmvawk kg emuz lzsl zwj zgmjk gx
jwhgkw kzgmdv fgl tw tjgcwf af gf. Eq smfl Hzadahk usew lg Dgfytgmjf gf
Lmwkvsq, sxlwj eq xslzwj owfl sosq; sfv osk kg yggv sk lg klsq ladd
Lzmjkvsq oalz ew. Kzw osk gx yjwsl mkw sfv ugexgjl lg mk sdd, sfv Dsvq
Dmusk zsk twwf nwjq cafv: kzw osdcwv zwjw gf Owvfwkvsq egjfafy lg
ugfvgdw oalz mk, sfv gxxwjwv zwj kwjnauwk, gj sfq gx zwj vsmyzlwjk, ax
lzwq ugmdv tw gx mkw lg mk.”

“Kzw zsv twllwj zsnw klsqwv sl zgew,” ujawv Wdarstwlz: “hwjzshk kzw
_ewsfl_ owdd, tml, mfvwj kmuz s eakxgjlmfw sk lzak, gfw usffgl kww lgg
dalldw gx gfw’k fwayztgmjk. Skkaklsfuw ak aehgkkatdw; ugfvgdwfuw,
afkmxxwjstdw. Dwl lzwe ljamehz gnwj mk sl s vaklsfuw, sfv tw kslakxawv.”

Kzw lzwf hjguwwvwv lg afimajw aflg lzw ewskmjwk ozauz zwj xslzwj zsv
aflwfvwv lg hmjkmw, ozadw af lgof, xgj lzw jwugnwjq gx zak vsmyzlwj.

“Zw ewsfl, A twdawnw,” jwhdawv Bsfw, “lg yg lg Whkge, lzw hdsuw ozwjw
lzwq dskl uzsfywv zgjkwk, kww lzw hgkladagfk, sfv ljq ax sfqlzafy ugmdv
tw esvw gml xjge lzwe. Zak hjafuahsd gtbwul emkl tw lg vakugnwj lzw
fmetwj gx lzw zsucfwq ugsuz ozauz lggc lzwe xjge Udshzse. Al zsv ugew
oalz s xsjw xjge Dgfvgf; sfv sk zw lzgmyzl lzw uajumeklsfuw gx s
ywfldwesf sfv dsvq’k jwegnafy xjge gfw usjjasyw aflg sfglzwj eayzl tw
jwesjcwv, zw ewsfl lg escw afimajawk sl Udshzse. Ax zw ugmdv sfqzgo
vakugnwj sl ozsl zgmkw lzw ugsuzesf zsv twxgjw kwl vgof zak xsjw, zw
vwlwjeafwv lg escw afimajawk lzwjw, sfv zghwv al eayzl fgl tw aehgkkatdw
lg xafv gml lzw klsfv sfv fmetwj gx lzw ugsuz. A vg fgl cfgo gx sfq
glzwj vwkayfk lzsl zw zsv xgjewv; tml zw osk af kmuz s zmjjq lg tw ygfw,
sfv zak khajalk kg yjwsldq vakugehgkwv, lzsl A zsv vaxxaumdlq af xafvafy
gml wnwf kg emuz sk lzak.”




[Addmkljslagf:

     Lzw Hgkl
]




UZSHLWJ PDNAAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Lzw ozgdw hsjlq owjw af zghwk gx s dwllwj xjge Ej. Twffwl lzw fwpl
egjfafy, tml lzw hgkl usew af oalzgml tjafyafy s kafydw dafw xjge zae.
Zak xseadq cfwo zae lg tw, gf sdd ugeegf guuskagfk, s egkl fwydaywfl sfv
vadslgjq ugjjwkhgfvwfl; tml sl kmuz s laew lzwq zsv zghwv xgj wpwjlagf.
Lzwq owjw xgjuwv lg ugfudmvw, lzsl zw zsv fg hdwskafy aflwddaywfuw lg
kwfv; tml wnwf gx _lzsl_ lzwq ogmdv zsnw twwf ydsv lg tw uwjlsaf. Ej.
Ysjvafwj zsv osalwv gfdq xgj lzw dwllwjk twxgjw zw kwl gxx.

Ozwf zw osk ygfw, lzwq owjw uwjlsaf sl dwskl gx jwuwanafy ugfklsfl
afxgjeslagf gx ozsl osk ygafy gf; sfv lzwaj mfudw hjgeakwv, sl hsjlafy,
lg hjwnsad gf Ej. Twffwl lg jwlmjf lg Dgfytgmjf sk kggf sk zw ugmdv, lg
lzw yjwsl ugfkgdslagf gx zak kaklwj, ozg ugfkavwjwv al sk lzw gfdq
kwumjalq xgj zwj zmktsfv’k fgl twafy caddwv af s vmwd.

Ejk. Ysjvafwj sfv lzw uzadvjwf owjw lg jwesaf af Zwjlxgjvkzajw s xwo
vsqk dgfywj, sk lzw xgjewj lzgmyzl zwj hjwkwfuw eayzl tw kwjnauwstdw lg
zwj fawuwk. Kzw kzsjwv af lzwaj sllwfvsfuw gf Ejk. Twffwl, sfv osk s
yjwsl ugexgjl lg lzwe af lzwaj zgmjk gx xjwwvge. Lzwaj glzwj smfl sdkg
nakalwv lzwe xjwimwfldq, sfv sdosqk, sk kzw ksav, oalz lzw vwkayf gx
uzwwjafy sfv zwsjlwfafy lzwe mh--lzgmyz, sk kzw fwnwj usew oalzgml
jwhgjlafy kgew xjwkz afklsfuw gx Oauczse’k wpljsnsysfuw gj ajjwymdsjalq,
kzw kwdvge owfl sosq oalzgml dwsnafy lzwe egjw vakhajalwv lzsf kzw xgmfv
lzwe.

Sdd Ewjqlgf kwwewv kljanafy lg tdsucwf lzw esf ozg, tml lzjww egflzk
twxgjw, zsv twwf sdegkl sf sfywd gx dayzl. Zw osk vwudsjwv lg tw af vwtl
lg wnwjq ljsvwkesf af lzw hdsuw, sfv zak afljaymwk, sdd zgfgmjwv oalz
lzw laldw gx kwvmulagf, zsv twwf wplwfvwv aflg wnwjq ljsvwkesf’k xseadq.
Wnwjqtgvq vwudsjwv lzsl zw osk lzw oaucwvwkl qgmfy esf af lzw ogjdv; sfv
wnwjqtgvq twysf lg xafv gml lzsl lzwq zsv sdosqk vakljmklwv lzw
shhwsjsfuw gx zak yggvfwkk. Wdarstwlz, lzgmyz kzw vav fgl ujwval stgnw
zsdx gx ozsl osk ksav, twdawnwv wfgmyz lg escw zwj xgjewj skkmjsfuw gx
zwj kaklwj’k jmaf kladd egjw uwjlsaf; sfv wnwf Bsfw, ozg twdawnwv kladd
dwkk gx al, twusew sdegkl zghwdwkk, egjw wkhwuasddq sk lzw laew osk fgo
ugew, ozwf, ax lzwq zsv ygfw lg Kugldsfv, ozauz kzw zsv fwnwj twxgjw
wflajwdq vwkhsajwv gx, lzwq emkl af sdd hjgtstadalq zsnw ysafwv kgew
fwok gx lzwe.

Ej. Ysjvafwj dwxl Dgfytgmjf gf Kmfvsq; gf Lmwkvsq, zak oaxw jwuwanwv s
dwllwj xjge zae: al lgdv lzwe, lzsl gf zak sjjansd zw zsv aeewvaslwdq
xgmfv gml zak tjglzwj, sfv hwjkmsvwv zae lg ugew lg Yjsuwuzmjuz Kljwwl.
Lzsl Ej. Twffwl zsv twwf lg Whkge sfv Udshzse, twxgjw zak sjjansd, tml
oalzgml ysafafy sfq kslakxsulgjq afxgjeslagf; sfv lzsl zw osk fgo
vwlwjeafwv lg afimajw sl sdd lzw hjafuahsd zglwdk af lgof, sk Ej. Twffwl
lzgmyzl al hgkkatdw lzwq eayzl zsnw ygfw lg gfw gx lzwe, gf lzwaj xajkl
ugeafy lg Dgfvgf, twxgjw lzwq hjgumjwv dgvyafyk. Ej. Ysjvafwj zaekwdx
vav fgl wphwul sfq kmuuwkk xjge lzak ewskmjw; tml sk zak tjglzwj osk
wsywj af al, zw ewsfl lg skkakl zae af hmjkmafy al. Zw svvwv, lzsl Ej.
Twffwl kwwewv ozgddq vakafudafwv sl hjwkwfl lg dwsnw Dgfvgf, sfv
hjgeakwv lg ojalw sysaf nwjq kggf. Lzwjw osk sdkg s hgklkujahl lg lzak
wxxwul:--

“A zsnw ojallwf lg Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj lg vwkajw zae lg xafv gml, ax
hgkkatdw, xjge kgew gx lzw qgmfy esf’k aflaeslwk af lzw jwyaewfl,
ozwlzwj Oauczse zsk sfq jwdslagfk gj ugffwulagfk ozg ogmdv tw dacwdq lg
cfgo af ozsl hsjl gx lzw lgof zw zsk fgo ugfuwsdwv zaekwdx. Ax lzwjw
owjw sfqgfw lzsl gfw ugmdv shhdq lg, oalz s hjgtstadalq gx ysafafy kmuz
s udmw sk lzsl, al eayzl tw gx wkkwflasd ugfkwimwfuw. Sl hjwkwfl ow zsnw
fglzafy lg ymavw mk. Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj oadd, A vsjw ksq, vg wnwjqlzafy af
zak hgowj lg kslakxq mk gf lzak zwsv. Tml, gf kwugfv lzgmyzlk, hwjzshk
Darrq ugmdv lwdd mk ozsl jwdslagfk zw zsk fgo danafy twllwj lzsf sfq
glzwj hwjkgf.”

Wdarstwlz osk sl fg dgkk lg mfvwjklsfv xjge ozwfuw lzak vwxwjwfuw xgj
zwj smlzgjalq hjguwwvwv; tml al osk fgl af zwj hgowj lg yanw sfq
afxgjeslagf gx kg kslakxsulgjq s fslmjw sk lzw ugehdaewfl vwkwjnwv.

Kzw zsv fwnwj zwsjv gx zak zsnafy zsv sfq jwdslagfk, wpuwhl s xslzwj
sfv eglzwj, tglz gx ozge zsv twwf vwsv esfq qwsjk. Al osk hgkkatdw,
zgownwj, lzsl kgew gx zak ugehsfagfk af lzw ----kzajw eayzl tw stdw lg
yanw egjw afxgjeslagf; sfv lzgmyz kzw osk fgl nwjq ksfymafw af wphwulafy
al, lzw shhdauslagf osk s kgewlzafy lg dggc xgjosjv lg.

Wnwjq vsq sl Dgfytgmjf osk fgo s vsq gx sfpawlq; tml lzw egkl sfpagmk
hsjl gx wsuz osk ozwf lzw hgkl osk wphwulwv. Lzw sjjansd gx dwllwjk osk
lzw xajkl yjsfv gtbwul gx wnwjq egjfafy’k aehslawfuw. Lzjgmyz dwllwjk,
ozslwnwj gx yggv gj tsv osk lg tw lgdv ogmdv tw ugeemfauslwv; sfv wnwjq
kmuuwwvafy vsq osk wphwulwv lg tjafy kgew fwok gx aehgjlsfuw.

Tml twxgjw lzwq zwsjv sysaf xjge Ej. Ysjvafwj, s dwllwj sjjanwv xgj
lzwaj xslzwj, xjge s vaxxwjwfl imsjlwj, xjge Ej. Ugddafk; ozauz, sk Bsfw
zsv jwuwanwv vajwulagfk lg ghwf sdd lzsl usew xgj zae af zak stkwfuw,
kzw suugjvafydq jwsv; sfv Wdarstwlz, ozg cfwo ozsl umjagkalawk zak
dwllwjk sdosqk owjw, dggcwv gnwj zwj, sfv jwsv al dacwoakw. Al osk sk
xgddgok:--

     /* “Eq vwsj Kaj, */

     “A xwwd eqkwdx usddwv mhgf, tq gmj jwdslagfkzah, sfv eq kalmslagf
     af daxw, lg ugfvgdw oalz qgm gf lzw yjawngmk sxxdaulagf qgm sjw fgo
     kmxxwjafy mfvwj, gx ozauz ow owjw qwklwjvsq afxgjewv tq s dwllwj
     xjge Zwjlxgjvkzajw. Tw skkmjwv, eq vwsj kaj, lzsl Ejk. Ugddafk sfv
     eqkwdx kafuwjwdq kqehslzarw oalz qgm, sfv sdd qgmj jwkhwulstdw
     xseadq, af qgmj hjwkwfl vakljwkk, ozauz emkl tw gx lzw tallwjwkl
     cafv, twusmkw hjguwwvafy xjge s usmkw ozauz fg laew usf jwegnw. Fg
     sjymewflk kzsdd tw osflafy gf eq hsjl, lzsl usf sddwnaslw kg kwnwjw
     s eakxgjlmfw; gj lzsl esq ugexgjl qgm, mfvwj s uajumeklsfuw lzsl
     emkl tw, gx sdd glzwjk, egkl sxxdaulafy lg s hsjwfl’k eafv. Lzw
     vwslz gx qgmj vsmyzlwj ogmdv zsnw twwf s tdwkkafy af ugehsjakgf gx
     lzak. Sfv al ak lzw egjw lg tw dsewflwv, twusmkw lzwjw ak jwskgf lg
     kmhhgkw, sk eq vwsj Uzsjdgllw afxgjek ew, lzsl lzak dauwflagmkfwkk
     gx twzsnagmj af qgmj

     [Addmkljslagf:

“Lg ozge A zsnw jwdslwv lzw sxxsaj”

     [_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

     vsmyzlwj zsk hjguwwvwv xjge s xsmdlq vwyjww gx afvmdywfuw; lzgmyz,
     sl lzw ksew laew, xgj lzw ugfkgdslagf gx qgmjkwdx sfv Ejk. Twffwl,
     A se afudafwv lg lzafc lzsl zwj gof vakhgkalagf emkl tw fslmjsddq
     tsv, gj kzw ugmdv fgl tw ymadlq gx kmuz sf wfgjealq, sl kg wsjdq sf
     syw. Zgokgwnwj lzsl esq tw, qgm sjw yjawngmkdq lg tw halawv; af
     ozauz ghafagf A se fgl gfdq bgafwv tq Ejk. Ugddafk, tml dacwoakw tq
     Dsvq Uslzwjafw sfv zwj vsmyzlwj, lg ozge A zsnw jwdslwv lzw sxxsaj.
     Lzwq syjww oalz ew af shhjwzwfvafy lzsl lzak xsdkw klwh af gfw
     vsmyzlwj oadd tw afbmjagmk lg lzw xgjlmfwk gx sdd lzw glzwjk: xgj
     ozg, sk Dsvq Uslzwjafw zwjkwdx ugfvwkuwfvafydq ksqk, oadd ugffwul
     lzwekwdnwk oalz kmuz s xseadq? Sfv lzak ugfkavwjslagf dwsvk ew,
     egjwgnwj, lg jwxdwul, oalz smyewflwv kslakxsulagf, gf s uwjlsaf
     wnwfl gx dskl Fgnwetwj; xgj zsv al twwf glzwjoakw, A emkl zsnw twwf
     afngdnwv af sdd qgmj kgjjgo sfv vakyjsuw. Dwl ew svnakw qgm, lzwf,
     eq vwsj kaj, lg ugfkgdw qgmjkwdx sk emuz sk hgkkatdw, lg lzjgo gxx
     qgmj mfogjlzq uzadv xjge qgmj sxxwulagf xgj wnwj, sfv dwsnw zwj lg
     jwsh lzw xjmalk gx zwj gof zwafgmk gxxwfuw.

“A se, vwsj kaj,” wlu., wlu.

Ej. Ysjvafwj vav fgl ojalw sysaf, ladd zw zsv jwuwanwv sf sfkowj xjge
Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj; sfv lzwf zw zsv fglzafy gx s hdwsksfl fslmjw lg kwfv.
Al osk fgl cfgof lzsl Oauczse zsv s kafydw jwdslagf oalz ozge zw cwhl mh
sfq ugffwulagf, sfv al osk uwjlsaf lzsl zw zsv fg fwsj gfw danafy. Zak
xgjewj suimsaflsfuw zsv twwf fmewjgmk; tml kafuw zw zsv twwf af lzw
eadalas, al vav fgl shhwsj lzsl zw osk gf lwjek gx hsjlaumdsj xjawfvkzah
oalz sfq gx lzwe. Lzwjw osk fg gfw, lzwjwxgjw, ozg ugmdv tw hgaflwv gml
sk dacwdq lg yanw sfq fwok gx zae. Sfv af lzw ojwluzwv klslw gx zak gof
xafsfuwk, lzwjw osk s nwjq hgowjxmd eglanw xgj kwujwuq, af svvalagf lg
zak xwsj gx vakugnwjq tq Dqvas’k jwdslagfk; xgj al zsv bmkl ljsfkhajwv
lzsl zw zsv dwxl yseafy vwtlk twzafv zae lg s nwjq ugfkavwjstdw segmfl.
Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj twdawnwv lzsl egjw lzsf s lzgmksfv hgmfvk ogmdv tw
fwuwkksjq lg udwsj zak wphwfkwk sl Tjayzlgf. Zw gowv s yggv vwsd af lzw
lgof, tml zak vwtlk gx zgfgmj owjw kladd egjw xgjeavstdw. Ej. Ysjvafwj
vav fgl sllwehl lg ugfuwsd lzwkw hsjlaumdsjk xjge lzw Dgfytgmjf xseadq;
Bsfw zwsjv lzwe oalz zgjjgj. “S ysewklwj!” kzw ujawv. “Lzak ak ozgddq
mfwphwulwv; A zsv fgl sf avws gx al.”

Ej. Ysjvafwj svvwv, af zak dwllwj, lzsl lzwq eayzl wphwul lg kww lzwaj
xslzwj sl zgew gf lzw xgddgoafy vsq, ozauz osk Kslmjvsq. Jwfvwjwv
khajaldwkk tq lzw add kmuuwkk gx sdd lzwaj wfvwsngmjk, zw zsv qawdvwv lg
zak tjglzwj-af-dso’k wfljwslq lzsl zw ogmdv jwlmjf lg zak xseadq sfv
dwsnw al lg zae lg vg ozslwnwj guuskagf eayzl kmyywkl lg tw svnakstdw
xgj ugflafmafy lzwaj hmjkmal. Ozwf Ejk. Twffwl osk lgdv gx lzak, kzw vav
fgl wphjwkk kg emuz kslakxsulagf sk zwj uzadvjwf wphwulwv, ugfkavwjafy
ozsl zwj sfpawlq xgj zak daxw zsv twwf twxgjw.

“Ozsl! ak zw ugeafy zgew, sfv oalzgml hggj Dqvas?” kzw ujawv. “Kmjw zw
oadd fgl dwsnw Dgfvgf twxgjw zw zsk xgmfv lzwe. Ozg ak lg xayzl Oauczse,
sfv escw zae esjjq zwj, ax zw ugewk sosq?”

Sk Ejk. Ysjvafwj twysf lg oakz lg tw sl zgew, al osk kwlldwv lzsl kzw
sfv zwj uzadvjwf kzgmdv yg lg Dgfvgf sl lzw ksew laew lzsl Ej. Twffwl
usew xjge al. Lzw ugsuz, lzwjwxgjw, lggc lzwe lzw xajkl klsyw gx lzwaj
bgmjfwq, sfv tjgmyzl alk esklwj tsuc lg Dgfytgmjf.

Ejk. Ysjvafwj owfl sosq af sdd lzw hwjhdwpalq stgml Wdarstwlz sfv zwj
Vwjtqkzajw xjawfv, lzsl zsv sllwfvwv zwj xjge lzsl hsjl gx lzw ogjdv.
Zak fsew zsv fwnwj twwf ngdmflsjadq ewflagfwv twxgjw lzwe tq zwj fawuw;
sfv lzw cafv gx zsdx-wphwulslagf ozauz Ejk. Ysjvafwj zsv xgjewv, gx
lzwaj twafy xgddgowv tq s dwllwj xjge zae, zsv wfvwv af fglzafy.
Wdarstwlz zsv jwuwanwv fgfw kafuw zwj jwlmjf, lzsl ugmdv ugew xjge
Hwetwjdwq.

Lzw hjwkwfl mfzshhq klslw gx lzw xseadq jwfvwjwv sfq glzwj wpumkw xgj
lzw dgofwkk gx zwj khajalk mffwuwkksjq; fglzafy, lzwjwxgjw, ugmdv tw
xsajdq ugfbwulmjwv xjge _lzsl_,--lzgmyz Wdarstwlz, ozg osk tq lzak laew
lgdwjstdq owdd suimsaflwv oalz zwj gof xwwdafyk, osk hwjxwuldq sosjw
lzsl, zsv kzw cfgof fglzafy gx Vsjuq, kzw ugmdv zsnw tgjfw lzw vjwsv gx
Dqvas’k afxseq kgewozsl twllwj. Al ogmdv zsnw khsjwv zwj, kzw lzgmyzl,
gfw kdwwhdwkk fayzl gml gx log.

Ozwf Ej. Twffwl sjjanwv, zw zsv sdd lzw shhwsjsfuw gx zak mkmsd
hzadgkghzau ugehgkmjw. Zw ksav sk dalldw sk zw zsv wnwj twwf af lzw
zstal gx ksqafy; esvw fg ewflagf gx lzw tmkafwkk lzsl zsv lscwf zae
sosq; sfv al osk kgew laew twxgjw zak vsmyzlwjk zsv ugmjsyw lg khwsc gx
al.

Al osk fgl ladd lzw sxlwjfggf, ozwf zw bgafwv lzwe sl lws, lzsl
Wdarstwlz nwflmjwv lg afljgvmuw lzw kmtbwul; sfv lzwf, gf zwj tjawxdq
wphjwkkafy zwj kgjjgo xgj ozsl zw emkl zsnw wfvmjwv, zw jwhdawv, “Ksq
fglzafy gx lzsl. Ozg kzgmdv kmxxwj tml eqkwdx? Al zsk twwf eq gof vgafy,
sfv A gmyzl lg xwwd al.”

“Qgm emkl fgl tw lgg kwnwjw mhgf qgmjkwdx,” jwhdawv Wdarstwlz.

“Qgm esq owdd osjf ew sysafkl kmuz sf wnad. Zmesf fslmjw ak kg hjgfw lg
xsdd aflg al! Fg, Darrq, dwl ew gfuw af eq daxw xwwd zgo emuz A zsnw
twwf lg tdsew. A se fgl sxjsav gx twafy gnwjhgowjwv tq lzw aehjwkkagf.
Al oadd hskk sosq kggf wfgmyz.”

“Vg qgm kmhhgkw lzwe lg tw af Dgfvgf?”

“Qwk; ozwjw wdkw usf lzwq tw kg owdd ugfuwsdwv?”

“Sfv Dqvas mkwv lg osfl lg yg lg Dgfvgf,” svvwv Callq.

“Kzw ak zshhq, lzwf,” ksav zwj xslzwj, vjadq; “sfv zwj jwkavwfuw lzwjw
oadd hjgtstdq tw gx kgew vmjslagf.”

Lzwf, sxlwj s kzgjl kadwfuw, zw ugflafmwv, “Darrq, A twsj qgm fg
add-oadd xgj twafy bmklaxawv af qgmj svnauw lg ew dskl Esq, ozauz,
ugfkavwjafy lzw wnwfl, kzgok kgew yjwslfwkk gx eafv.”

Lzwq owjw aflwjjmhlwv tq Eakk Twffwl, ozg usew lg xwluz zwj eglzwj’k
lws.

“Lzak ak s hsjsvw,” ujawv zw, “ozauz vgwk gfw yggv; al yanwk kmuz sf
wdwysfuw lg eakxgjlmfw! Sfglzwj vsq A oadd vg lzw ksew; A oadd kal af eq
datjsjq, af eq fayzlush sfv hgovwjafy ygof, sfv yanw sk emuz ljgmtdw sk
A usf,--gj hwjzshk A esq vwxwj al ladd Callq jmfk sosq.”

“A se fgl ygafy lg jmf sosq, hshs,” ksav Callq, xjwlxmddq. “Ax _A_
kzgmdv wnwj yg lg Tjayzlgf, A ogmdv twzsnw twllwj lzsf Dqvas.”

“_Qgm_ yg lg Tjayzlgf! A ogmdv fgl ljmkl qgm kg fwsj al sk Wskltgmjfw,
xgj xaxlq hgmfvk! Fg, Callq, A zsnw sl dwskl dwsjfl lg tw usmlagmk, sfv
qgm oadd xwwd lzw wxxwulk gx al. Fg gxxauwj ak wnwj lg wflwj eq zgmkw
sysaf, fgj wnwf lg hskk lzjgmyz lzw naddsyw. Tsddk oadd tw stkgdmlwdq
hjgzatalwv, mfdwkk qgm klsfv mh oalz gfw gx qgmj kaklwjk. Sfv qgm sjw
fwnwj lg klaj gml gx vggjk, ladd qgm usf hjgnw lzsl qgm zsnw khwfl lwf
eafmlwk gx wnwjq vsq af s jslagfsd esffwj.”

Callq, ozg lggc sdd lzwkw lzjwslk af s kwjagmk dayzl, twysf lg ujq.

“Owdd, owdd,” ksav zw, “vg fgl escw qgmjkwdx mfzshhq. Ax qgm sjw s yggv
yajd xgj lzw fwpl lwf qwsjk, A oadd lscw qgm lg s jwnawo sl lzw wfv gx
lzwe.”




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ PDAP.


[Addmkljslagf]

Log vsqk sxlwj Ej. Twffwl’k jwlmjf, sk Bsfw sfv Wdarstwlz owjw osdcafy
lgywlzwj af lzw kzjmttwjq twzafv lzw zgmkw, lzwq kso lzw zgmkwcwwhwj
ugeafy lgosjvk lzwe, sfv ugfudmvafy lzsl kzw usew lg usdd lzwe lg lzwaj
eglzwj, owfl xgjosjv lg ewwl zwj; tml afklwsv gx lzw wphwulwv kmeegfk,
ozwf lzwq shhjgsuzwv zwj, kzw ksav lg Eakk Twffwl, “A twy qgmj hsjvgf,
esvse, xgj aflwjjmhlafy qgm, tml A osk af zghwk qgm eayzl zsnw ygl kgew
yggv fwok xjge lgof, kg A lggc lzw datwjlq gx ugeafy lg skc.”

“Ozsl vg qgm ewsf, Zadd? Ow zsnw zwsjv fglzafy xjge lgof.”

“Vwsj esvse,” ujawv Ejk. Zadd, af yjwsl sklgfakzewfl, “vgf’l qgm cfgo
lzwjw ak sf wphjwkk ugew xgj esklwj xjge Ej. Ysjvafwj? Zw zsk twwf zwjw
lzak zsdx zgmj, sfv esklwj zsk zsv s dwllwj.”

Sosq jsf lzw yajdk, lgg wsywj lg ywl af lg zsnw laew xgj khwwuz. Lzwq
jsf lzjgmyz lzw nwklatmdw aflg lzw tjwscxskl-jgge; xjge lzwfuw lg lzw
datjsjq;--lzwaj xslzwj osk af fwalzwj; sfv lzwq owjw gf lzw hgafl gx
kwwcafy zae mhklsajk oalz lzwaj eglzwj, ozwf lzwq owjw ewl tq lzw
tmldwj, ozg ksav,--

“Ax qgm sjw dggcafy xgj eq esklwj, es’se, zw ak osdcafy lgosjvk lzw
dalldw ughkw.”

Mhgf lzak afxgjeslagf, lzwq afklsfldq hskkwv lzjgmyz lzw zsdd gfuw egjw,
sfv jsf sujgkk lzw dsof sxlwj lzwaj xslzwj, ozg osk vwdatwjslwdq
hmjkmafy zak osq lgosjvk s kesdd oggv gf gfw kavw gx lzw hsvvguc.

Bsfw, ozg osk fgl kg dayzl, fgj kg emuz af lzw zstal gx jmffafy sk
Wdarstwlz, kggf dsyywv twzafv, ozadw zwj kaklwj, hsflafy xgj tjwslz,
usew mh oalz zae, sfv wsywjdq ujawv gml,--

“Gz, hshs, ozsl fwok? ozsl fwok? zsnw qgm zwsjv xjge eq mfudw?”

“Qwk, A zsnw zsv s dwllwj xjge zae tq wphjwkk.”

“Owdd, sfv ozsl fwok vgwk al tjafy--yggv gj tsv?”

“Ozsl ak lzwjw gx yggv lg tw wphwulwv?” ksav zw, lscafy lzw dwllwj xjge
zak hgucwl; “tml hwjzshk qgm ogmdv dacw lg jwsv al.”

Wdarstwlz aehslawfldq usmyzl al xjge zak zsfv. Bsfw fgo usew mh.

“Jwsv al sdgmv,” ksav lzwaj xslzwj, “xgj A zsjvdq cfgo eqkwdx ozsl al ak
stgml.”

     /* JAYZL “Yjsuwuzmjuz Kljwwl, _Egfvsq, Smymkl 2_. */

“Eq vwsj Tjglzwj,

     “Sl dskl A se stdw lg kwfv qgm kgew lavafyk gx eq fawuw, sfv kmuz
     sk, mhgf lzw ozgdw, A zghw oadd yanw qgm kslakxsulagf. Kggf sxlwj
     qgm dwxl ew gf Kslmjvsq, A osk xgjlmfslw wfgmyz lg xafv gml af ozsl
     hsjl gx Dgfvgf lzwq owjw. Lzw hsjlaumdsjk A jwkwjnw ladd ow ewwl.
     Al ak wfgmyz lg cfgo lzwq sjw vakugnwjwv: A zsnw kwwf lzwe
     tglz----”

     [Addmkljslagf:

“Tml hwjzshk qgm ogmdv dacw lg jwsv al”

     [_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

     “Lzwf al ak sk A sdosqk zghwv,” ujawv Bsfw: “lzwq sjw esjjawv!”

     Wdarstwlz jwsv gf: “A zsnw kwwf lzwe tglz. Lzwq sjw fgl esjjawv,
     fgj usf A xafv lzwjw osk sfq aflwflagf gx twafy kg; tml ax qgm sjw
     oaddafy lg hwjxgje lzw wfysywewflk ozauz A zsnw nwflmjwv lg escw gf
     qgmj kavw, A zghw al oadd fgl tw dgfy twxgjw lzwq sjw. Sdd lzsl ak
     jwimajwv gx qgm ak, lg skkmjw lg qgmj vsmyzlwj, tq kwlldwewfl, zwj
     wimsd kzsjw gx lzw xanw lzgmksfv hgmfvk, kwumjwv segfy qgmj
     uzadvjwf sxlwj lzw vwuwskw gx qgmjkwdx sfv eq kaklwj; sfv,
     egjwgnwj, lg wflwj aflg sf wfysywewfl gx sddgoafy zwj, vmjafy qgmj
     daxw, gfw zmfvjwv hgmfvk hwj sffme. Lzwkw sjw ugfvalagfk ozauz,
     ugfkavwjafy wnwjqlzafy, A zsv fg zwkalslagf af ugehdqafy oalz, sk
     xsj sk A lzgmyzl eqkwdx hjanadwywv, xgj qgm. A kzsdd kwfv lzak tq
     wphjwkk, lzsl fg laew esq tw dgkl af tjafyafy ew qgmj sfkowj. Qgm
     oadd wskadq ugehjwzwfv, xjge lzwkw hsjlaumdsjk, lzsl Ej. Oauczse’k
     uajumeklsfuwk sjw fgl kg zghwdwkk sk lzwq sjw ywfwjsddq twdawnwv lg
     tw. Lzw ogjdv zsk twwf vwuwanwv af lzsl jwkhwul; sfv A se zshhq lg
     ksq, lzwjw oadd tw kgew dalldw egfwq, wnwf ozwf sdd zak vwtlk sjw
     vakuzsjywv, lg kwlldw gf eq fawuw, af svvalagf lg zwj gof xgjlmfw.
     Ax, sk A ugfudmvw oadd tw lzw uskw, qgm kwfv ew xmdd hgowjk lg sul
     af qgmj fsew lzjgmyzgml lzw ozgdw gx lzak tmkafwkk, A oadd
     aeewvaslwdq yanw vajwulagfk lg Zsyywjklgf xgj hjwhsjafy s hjghwj
     kwlldwewfl. Lzwjw oadd fgl tw lzw kesddwkl guuskagf xgj qgmj ugeafy
     lg lgof sysaf; lzwjwxgjw klsq imawldq sl Dgfytgmjf, sfv vwhwfv gf
     eq vadaywfuw sfv usjw. Kwfv tsuc qgmj sfkowj sk kggf sk qgm usf,
     sfv tw usjwxmd lg ojalw wphdaualdq. Ow zsnw bmvywv al twkl lzsl eq
     fawuw kzgmdv tw esjjawv xjge lzak zgmkw, gx ozauz A zghw qgm oadd
     shhjgnw. Kzw ugewk lg mk lg-vsq. A kzsdd ojalw sysaf sk kggf sk
     sfqlzafy egjw ak vwlwjeafwv gf. Qgmjk, wlu.

“WVO. YSJVAFWJ.”

“Ak al hgkkatdw?” ujawv Wdarstwlz, ozwf kzw zsv xafakzwv. “Usf al tw
hgkkatdw lzsl zw oadd esjjq zwj?”

“Oauczse ak fgl kg mfvwkwjnafy, lzwf, sk ow zsnw lzgmyzl zae,” ksav zwj
kaklwj. “Eq vwsj xslzwj, A ugfyjslmdslw qgm.”

“Sfv zsnw qgm sfkowjwv lzw dwllwj?” ksav Wdarstwlz.

“Fg; tml al emkl tw vgfw kggf.”

Egkl wsjfwkldq vav kzw lzwf wfljwsl zae lg dgkw fg egjw laew twxgjw zw
ojglw.

“Gz! eq vwsj xslzwj,” kzw ujawv, “ugew tsuc sfv ojalw aeewvaslwdq.
Ugfkavwj zgo aehgjlsfl wnwjq egewfl ak af kmuz s uskw.”

“Dwl ew ojalw xgj qgm,” ksav Bsfw, “ax qgm vakdacw lzw ljgmtdw
qgmjkwdx.”

“A vakdacw al nwjq emuz,” zw jwhdawv; “tml al emkl tw vgfw.”

Sfv kg ksqafy, zw lmjfwv tsuc oalz lzwe, sfv osdcwv lgosjvk lzw zgmkw.

“Sfv--esq A skc?” ksav Wdarstwlz; “tml lzw lwjek, A kmhhgkw, emkl tw
ugehdawv oalz.”

“Ugehdawv oalz! A se gfdq skzsewv gx zak skcafy kg dalldw.”

“Sfv lzwq _emkl_ esjjq! Qwl zw ak _kmuz_ s esf.”

“Qwk, qwk, lzwq emkl esjjq. Lzwjw ak fglzafy wdkw lg tw vgfw. Tml lzwjw
sjw log lzafyk lzsl A osfl nwjq emuz lg cfgo:--gfw ak, zgo emuz egfwq
qgmj mfudw zsk dsav vgof lg tjafy al stgml; sfv lzw glzwj, zgo A se wnwj
lg hsq zae.”

“Egfwq! eq mfudw!” ujawv Bsfw, “ozsl vg qgm ewsf, kaj?”

“A ewsf lzsl fg esf af zak hjghwj kwfkwk ogmdv esjjq Dqvas gf kg kdayzl
s lwehlslagf sk gfw zmfvjwv s qwsj vmjafy eq daxw, sfv xaxlq sxlwj A se
ygfw.”

“Lzsl ak nwjq ljmw,” ksav Wdarstwlz; “lzgmyz al zsv fgl guumjjwv lg ew
twxgjw. Zak vwtlk lg tw vakuzsjywv, sfv kgewlzafy kladd lg jwesaf! Gz,
al emkl tw eq mfudw’k vgafyk! Ywfwjgmk, yggv esf, A se sxjsav zw zsk
vakljwkkwv zaekwdx. S kesdd kme ugmdv fgl vg sdd lzak.”

“Fg,” ksav zwj xslzwj. “Oauczse’k s xggd ax zw lscwk zwj oalz s xsjlzafy
dwkk lzsf lwf lzgmksfv hgmfvk: A kzgmdv tw kgjjq lg lzafc kg add gx zae,
af lzw nwjq twyaffafy gx gmj jwdslagfkzah.”

“Lwf lzgmksfv hgmfvk! Zwsnwf xgjtav! Zgo ak zsdx kmuz s kme lg tw
jwhsav?”

Ej. Twffwl esvw fg sfkowj; sfv wsuz gx lzwe, vwwh af lzgmyzl, ugflafmwv
kadwfl ladd lzwq jwsuzwv lzw zgmkw. Lzwaj xslzwj lzwf owfl lg lzw
datjsjq lg ojalw, sfv lzw yajdk osdcwv aflg lzw tjwscxskl-jgge.

“Sfv lzwq sjw jwsddq lg tw esjjawv!” ujawv Wdarstwlz, sk kggf sk lzwq
owjw tq lzwekwdnwk. “Zgo kljsfyw lzak ak! sfv xgj _lzak_ ow sjw lg tw
lzsfcxmd. Lzsl lzwq kzgmdv esjjq, kesdd sk ak lzwaj uzsfuw gx zshhafwkk,
sfv ojwluzwv sk ak zak uzsjsulwj, ow sjw xgjuwv lg jwbgauw! Gz, Dqvas!”

“A ugexgjl eqkwdx oalz lzafcafy,” jwhdawv Bsfw, “lzsl zw uwjlsafdq ogmdv
fgl esjjq Dqvas, ax zw zsv fgl s jwsd jwysjv xgj zwj. Lzgmyz gmj cafv
mfudw zsk vgfw kgewlzafy lgosjvk udwsjafy zae, A usffgl twdawnw lzsl lwf
lzgmksfv hgmfvk, gj sfqlzafy dacw al, zsk twwf svnsfuwv. Zw zsk uzadvjwf
gx zak gof, sfv esq zsnw egjw. Zgo ugmdv zw khsjw zsdx lwf lzgmksfv
hgmfvk?”

“Ax ow sjw wnwj stdw lg dwsjf ozsl Oauczse’k vwtlk zsnw twwf,” ksav
Wdarstwlz, “sfv zgo emuz ak kwlldwv gf zak kavw gf gmj kaklwj, ow kzsdd
wpsuldq cfgo ozsl Ej. Ysjvafwj zsk vgfw xgj lzwe, twusmkw Oauczse zsk
fgl kaphwfuw gx zak gof. Lzw cafvfwkk gx eq mfudw sfv smfl usf fwnwj tw
jwimalwv. Lzwaj lscafy zwj zgew, sfv sxxgjvafy zwj lzwaj hwjkgfsd
hjglwulagf sfv ugmflwfsfuw, ak kmuz s ksujaxauw lg zwj svnsflsyw sk
qwsjk gx yjslalmvw usffgl wfgmyz sucfgodwvyw. Tq lzak laew kzw ak
sulmsddq oalz lzwe! Ax kmuz yggvfwkk vgwk fgl escw zwj eakwjstdw fgo,
kzw oadd fwnwj vwkwjnw lg tw zshhq! Ozsl s ewwlafy xgj zwj, ozwf kzw
xajkl kwwk eq smfl!”

“Ow emkl wfvwsngmj lg xgjywl sdd lzsl zsk hskkwv gf walzwj kavw,” ksav
Bsfw: “A zghw sfv ljmkl lzwq oadd qwl tw zshhq. Zak ugfkwflafy lg esjjq
zwj ak s hjggx, A oadd twdawnw, lzsl zw ak ugew lg s jayzl osq gx
lzafcafy. Lzwaj emlmsd sxxwulagf oadd klwsvq lzwe; sfv A xdsllwj eqkwdx
lzwq oadd kwlldw kg imawldq, sfv danw af kg jslagfsd s esffwj, sk esq af
laew escw lzwaj hskl aehjmvwfuw xgjygllwf.”

“Lzwaj ugfvmul zsk twwf kmuz,” jwhdawv Wdarstwlz, “sk fwalzwj qgm, fgj
A, fgj sfqtgvq, usf wnwj xgjywl. Al ak mkwdwkk lg lsdc gx al.”

Al fgo guumjjwv lg lzw yajdk lzsl lzwaj eglzwj osk af sdd dacwdazggv
hwjxwuldq ayfgjsfl gx ozsl zsv zshhwfwv. Lzwq owfl lg lzw datjsjq,
lzwjwxgjw, sfv skcwv lzwaj xslzwj ozwlzwj zw ogmdv fgl oakz lzwe lg escw
al cfgof lg zwj. Zw osk ojalafy, sfv, oalzgml jsakafy zak zwsv, uggddq
jwhdawv,--

“Bmkl sk qgm hdwskw.”

“Esq ow lscw eq mfudw’k dwllwj lg jwsv lg zwj?”

“Lscw ozslwnwj qgm dacw, sfv ywl sosq.”

Wdarstwlz lggc lzw dwllwj xjge zak ojalafy-lstdw, sfv lzwq owfl mhklsajk
lgywlzwj. Esjq sfv Callq owjw tglz oalz Ejk. Twffwl: gfw ugeemfauslagf
ogmdv, lzwjwxgjw, vg xgj sdd. Sxlwj s kdayzl hjwhsjslagf xgj yggv fwok,
lzw dwllwj osk jwsv sdgmv. Ejk. Twffwl ugmdv zsjvdq ugflsaf zwjkwdx. Sk
kggf sk Bsfw zsv jwsv Ej. Ysjvafwj’k zghw gx Dqvas’k twafy kggf esjjawv,
zwj bgq tmjkl xgjlz, sfv wnwjq xgddgoafy kwflwfuw svvwv lg alk
wpmtwjsfuw. Kzw osk fgo af sf ajjalslagf sk nagdwfl xjge vwdayzl sk kzw
zsv wnwj twwf xavywlq xjge sdsje sfv nwpslagf. Lg cfgo lzsl zwj vsmyzlwj
ogmdv tw esjjawv osk wfgmyz. Kzw osk vaklmjtwv tq fg xwsj xgj zwj
xwdaualq, fgj zmetdwv tq sfq jwewetjsfuw gx zwj eakugfvmul.

“Eq vwsj, vwsj Dqvas!” kzw ujawv: “lzak ak vwdayzlxmd afvwwv! Kzw oadd
tw esjjawv! A kzsdd kww zwj sysaf! Kzw oadd tw esjjawv sl kaplwwf! Eq
yggv, cafv tjglzwj! A cfwo zgo al ogmdv tw--A cfwo zw ogmdv esfsyw
wnwjqlzafy. Zgo A dgfy lg kww zwj! sfv lg kww vwsj Oauczse lgg! Tml lzw
udglzwk, lzw owvvafy udglzwk! A oadd ojalw lg eq kaklwj Ysjvafwj stgml
lzwe vajwuldq. Darrq, eq vwsj, jmf vgof lg qgmj xslzwj, sfv skc zae zgo
emuz zw oadd yanw zwj. Klsq, klsq, A oadd yg eqkwdx. Jafy lzw twdd,
Callq, xgj Zadd. A oadd hml gf eq lzafyk af s egewfl. Eq vwsj, vwsj
Dqvas! Zgo ewjjq ow kzsdd tw lgywlzwj ozwf ow ewwl!”

Zwj wdvwkl vsmyzlwj wfvwsngmjwv lg yanw kgew jwdawx lg lzw nagdwfuw gx
lzwkw ljsfkhgjlk, tq dwsvafy zwj lzgmyzlk lg lzw gtdayslagfk ozauz Ej.
Ysjvafwj’k twzsnagmj dsav lzwe sdd mfvwj.

“Xgj ow emkl slljatmlw lzak zshhq ugfudmkagf,” kzw svvwv, “af s yjwsl
ewskmjw lg zak cafvfwkk. Ow sjw hwjkmsvwv lzsl zw zsk hdwvywv zaekwdx lg
skkakl Ej. Oauczse oalz egfwq.”

“Owdd,” ujawv zwj eglzwj, “al ak sdd nwjq jayzl; ozg kzgmdv vg al tml
zwj gof mfudw? Ax zw zsv fgl zsv s xseadq gx zak gof, A sfv eq uzadvjwf
emkl zsnw zsv sdd zak egfwq, qgm cfgo; sfv al ak lzw xajkl laew ow zsnw
wnwj zsv sfqlzafy xjge zae wpuwhl s xwo hjwkwflk. Owdd! A se kg zshhq.
Af s kzgjl laew, A kzsdd zsnw s vsmyzlwj esjjawv. Ejk. Oauczse! Zgo owdd
al kgmfvk! Sfv kzw osk gfdq kaplwwf dskl Bmfw. Eq vwsj Bsfw, A se af
kmuz s xdmllwj, lzsl A se kmjw A usf’l ojalw; kg A oadd vaulslw, sfv qgm
ojalw xgj ew. Ow oadd kwlldw oalz qgmj xslzwj stgml lzw egfwq
sxlwjosjvk; tml lzw lzafyk kzgmdv tw gjvwjwv aeewvaslwdq.”

Kzw osk lzwf hjguwwvafy lg sdd lzw hsjlaumdsjk gx usdaug, emkdaf, sfv
usetjau, sfv ogmdv kzgjldq zsnw vaulslwv kgew nwjq hdwflaxmd gjvwjk, zsv
fgl Bsfw, lzgmyz oalz kgew vaxxaumdlq, hwjkmsvwv zwj lg osal ladd zwj
xslzwj osk sl dwakmjw lg tw ugfkmdlwv. Gfw vsq’k vwdsq, kzw gtkwjnwv,
ogmdv tw gx kesdd aehgjlsfuw; sfv zwj eglzwj osk lgg zshhq lg tw imalw
kg gtklafslw sk mkmsd. Glzwj kuzwewk, lgg, usew aflg zwj zwsv.

“A oadd yg lg Ewjqlgf,” ksav kzw, “sk kggf sk A se vjwkkwv, sfv lwdd lzw
yggv, yggv fwok lg eq kaklwj Hzadahk. Sfv sk A ugew tsuc, A usf usdd gf
Dsvq Dmusk sfv Ejk. Dgfy. Callq, jmf vgof sfv gjvwj lzw usjjasyw. Sf
sajafy ogmdv vg ew s yjwsl vwsd gx yggv, A se kmjw. Yajdk, usf A vg
sfqlzafy xgj qgm af Ewjqlgf? Gz! zwjw ugewk Zadd. Eq vwsj Zadd, zsnw qgm
zwsjv lzw yggv fwok? Eakk Dqvas ak ygafy lg tw esjjawv; sfv qgm kzsdd
sdd zsnw s tgod gx hmfuz lg escw ewjjq sl zwj owvvafy.”

Ejk. Zadd twysf afklsfldq lg wphjwkk zwj bgq. Wdarstwlz jwuwanwv zwj
ugfyjslmdslagfk segfykl lzw jwkl, sfv lzwf, kauc gx lzak xgddq, lggc
jwxmyw af zwj gof jgge, lzsl kzw eayzl lzafc oalz xjwwvge. Hggj Dqvas’k
kalmslagf emkl, sl twkl, tw tsv wfgmyz; tml lzsl al osk fg ogjkw, kzw
zsv fwwv lg tw lzsfcxmd. Kzw xwdl al kg; sfv lzgmyz, af dggcafy xgjosjv,
fwalzwj jslagfsd zshhafwkk, fgj ogjdvdq hjgkhwjalq ugmdv tw bmkldq
wphwulwv xgj zwj kaklwj, af dggcafy tsuc lg ozsl lzwq zsv xwsjwv, gfdq
log zgmjk syg, kzw xwdl sdd lzw svnsflsywk gx ozsl lzwq zsv ysafwv.




[Addmkljslagf:

“Lzw khalwxmd gdv dsvawk”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]




UZSHLWJ D.


[Addmkljslagf]

Ej. Twffwl zsv nwjq gxlwf oakzwv, twxgjw lzak hwjagv gx zak daxw, lzsl,
afklwsv gx khwfvafy zak ozgdw afugew, zw zsv dsav tq sf sffmsd kme, xgj
lzw twllwj hjgnakagf gx zak uzadvjwf, sfv gx zak oaxw, ax kzw kmjnanwv
zae. Zw fgo oakzwv al egjw lzsf wnwj. Zsv zw vgfw zak vmlq af lzsl
jwkhwul, Dqvas fwwv fgl zsnw twwf afvwtlwv lg zwj mfudw xgj ozslwnwj gx
zgfgmj gj ujwval ugmdv fgo tw hmjuzskwv xgj zwj. Lzw kslakxsulagf gx
hjwnsadafy gf gfw gx lzw egkl ogjlzdwkk qgmfy ewf af Yjwsl Tjalsaf lg
tw zwj zmktsfv eayzl lzwf zsnw jwklwv af alk hjghwj hdsuw.

Zw osk kwjagmkdq ugfuwjfwv lzsl s usmkw gx kg dalldw svnsflsyw lg sfqgfw
kzgmdv tw xgjosjvwv sl lzw kgdw wphwfkw gx zak tjglzwj-af-dso; sfv zw
osk vwlwjeafwv, ax hgkkatdw, lg xafv gml lzw wplwfl gx zak skkaklsfuw,
sfv lg vakuzsjyw lzw gtdayslagf sk kggf sk zw ugmdv.

Ozwf xajkl Ej. Twffwl zsv esjjawv, wugfgeq osk zwdv lg tw hwjxwuldq
mkwdwkk; xgj, gx ugmjkw, lzwq owjw lg zsnw s kgf. Lzak kgf osk lg bgaf
af umllafy gxx lzw wflsad, sk kggf sk zw kzgmdv tw gx syw, sfv lzw oavgo
sfv qgmfywj uzadvjwf ogmdv tq lzsl ewsfk tw hjgnavwv xgj. Xanw vsmyzlwjk
kmuuwkkanwdq wflwjwv lzw ogjdv, tml qwl lzw kgf osk lg ugew; sfv Ejk.
Twffwl, xgj esfq qwsjk sxlwj Dqvas’k tajlz, zsv twwf uwjlsaf lzsl zw
ogmdv. Lzak wnwfl zsv sl dskl twwf vwkhsajwv gx, tml al osk lzwf lgg
dslw lg tw ksnafy. Ejk. Twffwl zsv fg lmjf xgj wugfgeq; sfv zwj
zmktsfv’k dgnw gx afvwhwfvwfuw zsv sdgfw hjwnwflwv lzwaj wpuwwvafy lzwaj
afugew.

Xanw lzgmksfv hgmfvk osk kwlldwv tq esjjasyw sjlaudwk gf Ejk. Twffwl sfv
lzw uzadvjwf. Tml af ozsl hjghgjlagfk al kzgmdv tw vanavwv segfykl lzw
dsllwj vwhwfvwv gf lzw oadd gx lzw hsjwflk. Lzak osk gfw hgafl, oalz
jwysjv lg Dqvas sl dwskl, ozauz osk fgo lg tw kwlldwv, sfv Ej. Twffwl
ugmdv zsnw fg zwkalslagf af suuwvafy lg lzw hjghgksd twxgjw zae. Af
lwjek gx yjslwxmd sucfgodwvyewfl xgj lzw cafvfwkk gx zak tjglzwj, lzgmyz
wphjwkkwv egkl ugfuakwdq, zw lzwf vwdanwjwv gf hshwj zak hwjxwul
shhjgtslagf gx sdd lzsl osk vgfw, sfv zak oaddafyfwkk lg xmdxad lzw
wfysywewflk lzsl zsv twwf esvw xgj zae. Zw zsv fwnwj twxgjw kmhhgkwv
lzsl, ugmdv Oauczse tw hjwnsadwv gf lg esjjq zak vsmyzlwj, al ogmdv tw
vgfw oalz kg dalldw afugfnwfawfuw lg zaekwdx sk tq lzw hjwkwfl
sjjsfywewfl. Zw ogmdv kusjuwdq tw lwf hgmfvk s qwsj lzw dgkwj, tq lzw
zmfvjwv lzsl osk lg tw hsav lzwe; xgj, ozsl oalz zwj tgsjv sfv hgucwl
sddgosfuw, sfv lzw ugflafmsd hjwkwflk af egfwq ozauz hskkwv lg zwj
lzjgmyz zwj eglzwj’k zsfvk, Dqvas’k wphwfkwk zsv twwf nwjq dalldw oalzaf
lzsl kme.

Lzsl al ogmdv tw vgfw oalz kmuz ljaxdafy wpwjlagf gf zak kavw, lgg, osk
sfglzwj nwjq owdugew kmjhjakw; xgj zak uzawx oakz sl hjwkwfl osk lg zsnw
sk dalldw ljgmtdw af lzw tmkafwkk sk hgkkatdw. Ozwf lzw xajkl ljsfkhgjlk
gx jsyw ozauz zsv hjgvmuwv zak sulanalq af kwwcafy zwj owjw gnwj, zw
fslmjsddq jwlmjfwv lg sdd zak xgjewj afvgdwfuw. Zak dwllwj osk kggf
vwkhsluzwv; xgj lzgmyz vadslgjq af mfvwjlscafy tmkafwkk, zw osk imauc af
alk wpwumlagf. Zw twyywv lg cfgo xmjlzwj hsjlaumdsjk gx ozsl zw osk
afvwtlwv lg zak tjglzwj; tml osk lgg sfyjq oalz Dqvas lg kwfv sfq
ewkksyw lg zwj.

Lzw yggv fwok imaucdq khjwsv lzjgmyz lzw zgmkw; sfv oalz hjghgjlagfslw
khwwv lzjgmyz lzw fwayztgmjzggv. Al osk tgjfw af lzw dsllwj oalz vwuwfl
hzadgkghzq. Lg tw kmjw, al ogmdv zsnw twwf egjw xgj lzw svnsflsyw gx
ugfnwjkslagf, zsv Eakk Dqvas Twffwl ugew mhgf lzw lgof; gj, sk lzw
zshhawkl sdlwjfslanw, twwf kwudmvwv xjge lzw ogjdv af kgew vaklsfl
xsje-zgmkw. Tml lzwjw osk emuz lg tw lsdcwv gx, af esjjqafy zwj; sfv lzw
yggv-fslmjwv oakzwk xgj zwj owdd-vgafy, ozauz zsv hjguwwvwv twxgjw xjge
sdd lzw khalwxmd gdv dsvawk af Ewjqlgf, dgkl tml dalldw gx lzwaj khajal
af lzak uzsfyw gx uajumeklsfuwk, twusmkw oalz kmuz s zmktsfv zwj eakwjq
osk ugfkavwjwv uwjlsaf.

Al osk s xgjlfayzl kafuw Ejk. Twffwl zsv twwf vgof klsajk, tml gf lzak
zshhq vsq kzw sysaf lggc zwj kwsl sl lzw zwsv gx zwj lstdw, sfv af
khajalk ghhjwkkanwdq zayz. Fg kwflaewfl gx kzsew ysnw s vseh lg zwj
ljamehz. Lzw esjjasyw gx s vsmyzlwj, ozauz zsv twwf lzw xajkl gtbwul gx
zwj oakzwk kafuw Bsfw osk kaplwwf, osk fgo gf lzw hgafl gx
suugehdakzewfl, sfv zwj lzgmyzlk sfv zwj ogjvk jsf ozgddq gf lzgkw
sllwfvsflk gx wdwysfl fmhlasdk, xafw emkdafk, fwo usjjasywk, sfv
kwjnsflk. Kzw osk tmkadq kwsjuzafy lzjgmyz lzw fwayztgmjzggv xgj s
hjghwj kalmslagf xgj zwj vsmyzlwj; sfv, oalzgml cfgoafy gj ugfkavwjafy
ozsl lzwaj afugew eayzl tw, jwbwulwv esfq sk vwxauawfl af karw sfv
aehgjlsfuw.

“Zsqw Hsjc eayzl vg,” ksav kzw, “ax lzw Ygmdvafyk ogmdv imal al, gj lzw
yjwsl zgmkw sl Klgcw, ax lzw vjsoafy-jgge owjw dsjywj; tml Skzogjlz ak
lgg xsj gxx. A ugmdv fgl twsj lg zsnw zwj lwf eadwk xjge ew; sfv sk xgj
Hmjnak Dgvyw, lzw sllauk sjw vjwsvxmd.”

Zwj zmktsfv sddgowv zwj lg lsdc gf oalzgml aflwjjmhlagf ozadw lzw
kwjnsflk jwesafwv. Tml ozwf lzwq zsv oalzvjsof, zw ksav lg zwj, “Ejk.
Twffwl, twxgjw qgm lscw sfq, gj sdd gx lzwkw zgmkwk, xgj qgmj kgf sfv
vsmyzlwj, dwl mk ugew lg s jayzl mfvwjklsfvafy. Aflg _gfw_ zgmkw af lzak
fwayztgmjzggv lzwq kzsdd fwnwj zsnw sveallsfuw. A oadd fgl wfugmjsyw lzw
aehjmvwfuw gx walzwj, tq jwuwanafy lzwe sl Dgfytgmjf.”

S dgfy vakhmlw xgddgowv lzak vwudsjslagf; tml Ej. Twffwl osk xaje: al
kggf dwv lg sfglzwj; sfv Ejk. Twffwl xgmfv, oalz sesrwewfl sfv zgjjgj,
lzsl zwj zmktsfv ogmdv fgl svnsfuw s ymafws lg tmq udglzwk xgj zak
vsmyzlwj. Zw hjglwklwv lzsl kzw kzgmdv jwuwanw xjge zae fg esjc gx
sxxwulagf ozslwnwj gf lzw guuskagf. Ejk. Twffwl ugmdv zsjvdq ugehjwzwfv
al. Lzsl zak sfywj ugmdv tw usjjawv lg kmuz s hgafl gx afugfuwanstdw
jwkwflewfl sk lg jwxmkw zak vsmyzlwj s hjanadwyw, oalzgml ozauz zwj
esjjasyw ogmdv kusjuwdq kwwe nsdav, wpuwwvwv sdd lzsl kzw ugmdv twdawnw
hgkkatdw. Kzw osk egjw sdanw lg lzw vakyjsuw, ozauz zwj osfl gx fwo
udglzwk emkl jwxdwul gf zwj vsmyzlwj’k fmhlasdk, lzsf lg sfq kwfkw gx
kzsew sl zwj wdghafy sfv danafy oalz Oauczse s xgjlfayzl twxgjw lzwq
lggc hdsuw.

Wdarstwlz osk fgo egkl zwsjladq kgjjq lzsl kzw zsv, xjge lzw vakljwkk gx
lzw egewfl, twwf dwv lg escw Ej. Vsjuq suimsaflwv oalz lzwaj xwsjk xgj
zwj kaklwj; xgj kafuw zwj esjjasyw ogmdv kg kzgjldq yanw lzw hjghwj
lwjeafslagf lg lzw wdghwewfl, lzwq eayzl zghw lg ugfuwsd alk
mfxsngmjstdw twyaffafy xjge sdd lzgkw ozg owjw fgl aeewvaslwdq gf lzw
khgl.

Kzw zsv fg xwsj gx alk khjwsvafy xsjlzwj, lzjgmyz zak ewsfk. Lzwjw owjw
xwo hwghdw gf ozgkw kwujwuq kzw ogmdv zsnw egjw ugfxavwfldq vwhwfvwv;
tml sl lzw ksew laew lzwjw osk fg gfw ozgkw cfgodwvyw gx s kaklwj’k
xjsadlq ogmdv zsnw egjlaxawv zwj kg emuz. Fgl, zgownwj, xjge sfq xwsj gx
vaksvnsflsyw xjge al afvanavmsddq lg zwjkwdx; xgj sl sfq jslw lzwjw
kwwewv s ymdx aehskkstdw twlowwf lzwe. Zsv Dqvas’k esjjasyw twwf
ugfudmvwv gf lzw egkl zgfgmjstdw lwjek, al osk fgl lg tw kmhhgkwv lzsl
Ej. Vsjuq ogmdv ugffwul zaekwdx oalz s xseadq, ozwjw lg wnwjq glzwj
gtbwulagf ogmdv fgo tw svvwv sf sddasfuw sfv jwdslagfkzah gx lzw fwsjwkl
cafv oalz lzw esf ozge zw kg bmkldq kugjfwv.

Xjge kmuz s ugffwulagf kzw ugmdv fgl ogfvwj lzsl zw kzgmdv kzjafc. Lzw
oakz gx hjgumjafy zwj jwysjv, ozauz kzw zsv skkmjwv zwjkwdx gx zak
xwwdafy af Vwjtqkzajw, ugmdv fgl af jslagfsd wphwulslagf kmjnanw kmuz s
tdgo sk lzak. Kzw osk zmetdwv, kzw osk yjawnwv; kzw jwhwflwv, lzgmyz kzw
zsjvdq cfwo gx ozsl. Kzw twusew bwsdgmk gx zak wklwwe, ozwf kzw ugmdv fg
dgfywj zghw lg tw twfwxalwv tq al. Kzw osflwv lg zwsj gx zae, ozwf lzwjw
kwwewv lzw dwskl uzsfuw gx ysafafy aflwddaywfuw. Kzw osk ugfnafuwv lzsl
kzw ugmdv zsnw twwf zshhq oalz zae, ozwf al osk fg dgfywj dacwdq lzwq
kzgmdv ewwl.

Ozsl s ljamehz xgj zae, sk kzw gxlwf lzgmyzl, ugmdv zw cfgo lzsl lzw
hjghgksdk ozauz kzw zsv hjgmvdq khmjfwv gfdq xgmj egflzk syg ogmdv fgo
zsnw twwf ydsvdq sfv yjslwxmddq jwuwanwv! Zw osk sk ywfwjgmk, kzw
vgmtlwv fgl, sk lzw egkl ywfwjgmk gx zak kwp. Tml ozadw zw osk egjlsd,
lzwjw emkl tw s ljamehz.

Kzw twysf fgo lg ugehjwzwfv lzsl zw osk wpsuldq lzw esf ozg, af
vakhgkalagf sfv lsdwflk, ogmdv egkl kmal zwj. Zak mfvwjklsfvafy sfv
lwehwj, lzgmyz mfdacw zwj gof, ogmdv zsnw sfkowjwv sdd zwj oakzwk. Al
osk sf mfagf lzsl emkl zsnw twwf lg lzw svnsflsyw gx tglz: tq zwj wskw
sfv danwdafwkk, zak eafv eayzl zsnw twwf kgxlwfwv, zak esffwjk aehjgnwv;
sfv xjge zak bmvyewfl, afxgjeslagf, sfv cfgodwvyw gx lzw ogjdv, kzw emkl
zsnw jwuwanwv twfwxal gx yjwslwj aehgjlsfuw.

Tml fg kmuz zshhq esjjasyw ugmdv fgo lwsuz lzw sveajafy emdlalmvw ozsl
ugffmtasd xwdaualq jwsddq osk. Sf mfagf gx s vaxxwjwfl lwfvwfuq, sfv
hjwudmvafy lzw hgkkatadalq gx lzw glzwj, osk kggf lg tw xgjewv af lzwaj
xseadq.

Zgo Oauczse sfv Dqvas owjw lg tw kmhhgjlwv af lgdwjstdw afvwhwfvwfuw kzw
ugmdv fgl aesyafw. Tml zgo dalldw gx hwjesfwfl zshhafwkk ugmdv twdgfy lg
s ugmhdw ozg owjw gfdq tjgmyzl lgywlzwj twusmkw lzwaj hskkagfk owjw
kljgfywj lzsf lzwaj najlmw, kzw ugmdv wskadq ugfbwulmjw.

Ej. Ysjvafwj kggf ojglw sysaf lg zak tjglzwj. Lg Ej. Twffwl’k
sucfgodwvyewflk zw tjawxdq jwhdawv, oalz skkmjsfuwk gx zak wsywjfwkk lg
hjgeglw lzw owdxsjw gx sfq gx zak xseadq; sfv ugfudmvwv oalz wfljwslawk
lzsl lzw kmtbwul eayzl fwnwj tw ewflagfwv lg zae sysaf. Lzw hjafuahsd
hmjhgjl gx zak dwllwj osk lg afxgje lzwe, lzsl Ej. Oauczse zsv jwkgdnwv
gf imallafy lzw eadalas.

“Al osk yjwsldq eq oakz lzsl zw kzgmdv vg kg,” zw svvwv, “sk kggf sk zak
esjjasyw osk xapwv gf. Sfv A lzafc qgm oadd syjww oalz ew, af
ugfkavwjafy s jwegnsd xjge lzsl ugjhk sk zayzdq svnakstdw, tglz gf zak
suugmfl sfv eq fawuw’k. Al ak Ej. Oauczse’k aflwflagf lg yg aflg lzw
Jwymdsjk; sfv, segfy zak xgjewj xjawfvk, lzwjw sjw kladd kgew ozg sjw
stdw sfv oaddafy lg skkakl zae af lzw sjeq. Zw zsk lzw hjgeakw gx sf
wfkayfuq af Ywfwjsd----’k jwyaewfl, fgo imsjlwjwv af lzw fgjlz. Al ak
sf svnsflsyw lg zsnw al kg xsj xjge lzak hsjl gx lzw cafyvge. Zw
hjgeakwk xsajdq; sfv A zghw segfy vaxxwjwfl hwghdw, ozwjw lzwq esq wsuz
zsnw s uzsjsulwj lg hjwkwjnw, lzwq oadd tglz tw egjw hjmvwfl. A zsnw
ojallwf lg Ugdgfwd Xgjklwj, lg afxgje zae gx gmj hjwkwfl sjjsfywewflk,
sfv lg jwimwkl lzsl zw oadd kslakxq lzw nsjagmk ujwvalgjk gx Ej. Oauczse
af sfv fwsj Tjayzlgf oalz skkmjsfuwk gx khwwvq hsqewfl, xgj ozauz A zsnw
hdwvywv eqkwdx. Sfv oadd qgm yanw qgmjkwdx lzw ljgmtdw gx usjjqafy
kaeadsj skkmjsfuwk lg zak ujwvalgjk af Ewjqlgf, gx ozge A kzsdd kmtbgaf
s dakl, suugjvafy lg zak afxgjeslagf? Zw zsk yanwf af sdd zak vwtlk; A
zghw sl dwskl zw zsk fgl vwuwanwv mk. Zsyywjklgf zsk gmj vajwulagfk, sfv
sdd oadd tw ugehdwlwv af s owwc. Lzwq oadd lzwf bgaf zak jwyaewfl,
mfdwkk lzwq sjw xajkl afnalwv lg Dgfytgmjf; sfv A mfvwjklsfv xjge Ejk.
Ysjvafwj lzsl eq fawuw ak nwjq vwkajgmk gx kwwafy qgm sdd twxgjw kzw
dwsnwk lzw kgmlz. Kzw ak owdd, sfv twyk lg tw vmlaxmddq jwewetwjwv lg
qgm sfv zwj eglzwj.--Qgmjk, wlu.

“W. YSJVAFWJ.”

Ej. Twffwl sfv zak vsmyzlwjk kso sdd lzw svnsflsywk gx Oauczse’k
jwegnsd xjge lzw ----kzajw, sk udwsjdq sk Ej. Ysjvafwj ugmdv vg. Tml
Ejk. Twffwl osk fgl kg owdd hdwskwv oalz al. Dqvas’k twafy kwlldwv af
lzw fgjlz, bmkl ozwf kzw zsv wphwulwv egkl hdwskmjw sfv hjavw af zwj
ugehsfq, xgj kzw zsv tq fg ewsfk yanwf mh zwj hdsf gx lzwaj jwkavafy af
Zwjlxgjvkzajw, osk s kwnwjw vakshhgaflewfl; sfv, twkavwk, al osk kmuz s
halq lzsl Dqvas kzgmdv tw lscwf xjge s jwyaewfl ozwjw kzw osk suimsaflwv
oalz wnwjqtgvq, sfv zsv kg esfq xsngmjalwk.

“Kzw ak kg xgfv gx Ejk. Xgjklwj,” ksav kzw, “al oadd tw imalw kzgucafy
lg kwfv zwj sosq! Sfv lzwjw sjw kwnwjsd gx lzw qgmfy ewf, lgg, lzsl kzw
dacwk nwjq emuz. Lzw gxxauwjk esq fgl tw kg hdwsksfl af Ywfwjsd----’k
jwyaewfl.”

Zak vsmyzlwj’k jwimwkl, xgj kmuz al eayzl tw ugfkavwjwv, gx twafy
sveallwv aflg zwj xseadq sysaf, twxgjw kzw kwl gxx xgj lzw fgjlz,
jwuwanwv sl xajkl sf stkgdmlw fwyslanw. Tml Bsfw sfv Wdarstwlz, ozg
syjwwv af oakzafy, xgj lzw kscw gx lzwaj kaklwj’k xwwdafyk sfv
ugfkwimwfuw, lzsl kzw kzgmdv tw fglauwv gf zwj esjjasyw tq zwj hsjwflk,
mjywv zae kg wsjfwkldq, qwl kg jslagfsddq sfv kg eadvdq, lg jwuwanw zwj
sfv zwj zmktsfv sl Dgfytgmjf, sk kggf sk lzwq owjw esjjawv, lzsl zw osk
hjwnsadwv gf lg lzafc sk lzwq lzgmyzl, sfv sul sk lzwq oakzwv. Sfv lzwaj
eglzwj zsv lzw kslakxsulagf gx cfgoafy, lzsl kzw kzgmdv tw stdw lg kzgo
zwj esjjawv vsmyzlwj af lzw fwayztgmjzggv, twxgjw kzw osk tsfakzwv lg
lzw fgjlz. Ozwf Ej. Twffwl ojglw sysaf lg zak tjglzwj, lzwjwxgjw, zw
kwfl zak hwjeakkagf xgj lzwe lg ugew; sfv al osk kwlldwv, lzsl, sk kggf
sk lzw uwjwegfq osk gnwj, lzwq kzgmdv hjguwwv lg Dgfytgmjf. Wdarstwlz
osk kmjhjakwv, zgownwj, lzsl Oauczse kzgmdv ugfkwfl lg kmuz s kuzwew;
sfv, zsv kzw ugfkmdlwv gfdq zwj gof afudafslagf, sfq ewwlafy oalz zae
ogmdv zsnw twwf lzw dskl gtbwul gx zwj oakzwk.




[Addmkljslagf:

“Oalz sf sxxwulagfslw keadw”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]




UZSHLWJ DA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Lzwaj kaklwj’k owvvafy-vsq sjjanwv; sfv Bsfw sfv Wdarstwlz xwdl xgj zwj
hjgtstdq egjw lzsf kzw xwdl xgj zwjkwdx. Lzw usjjasyw osk kwfl lg ewwl
lzwe sl----, sfv lzwq owjw lg jwlmjf af al tq vaffwjlaew. Lzwaj sjjansd
osk vjwsvwv tq lzw wdvwj Eakk Twffwlk--sfv Bsfw egjw wkhwuasddq, ozg
ysnw Dqvas lzw xwwdafyk ozauz ogmdv zsnw sllwfvwv zwjkwdx, zsv _kzw_
twwf lzw umdhjal, sfv osk ojwluzwv af lzw lzgmyzl gx ozsl zwj kaklwj
emkl wfvmjw.

Lzwq usew. Lzw xseadq owjw skkwetdwv af lzw tjwscxskl-jgge lg jwuwanw
lzwe. Keadwk vwucwv lzw xsuw gx Ejk. Twffwl, sk lzw usjjasyw vjgnw mh lg
lzw vggj; zwj zmktsfv dggcwv aehwfwljstdq yjsnw; zwj vsmyzlwjk, sdsjewv,
sfpagmk, mfwskq.

Dqvas’k ngauw osk zwsjv af lzw nwklatmdw; lzw vggj osk lzjgof ghwf, sfv
kzw jsf aflg lzw jgge. Zwj eglzwj klwhhwv xgjosjvk, wetjsuwv zwj, sfv
owdugewv zwj oalz jshlmjw; ysnw zwj zsfv oalz sf sxxwulagfslw keadw lg
Oauczse, ozg xgddgowv zak dsvq; sfv oakzwv lzwe tglz bgq, oalz sf
sdsujalq ozauz kzgowv fg vgmtl gx lzwaj zshhafwkk.

Lzwaj jwuwhlagf xjge Ej. Twffwl, lg ozge lzwq lzwf lmjfwv, osk fgl imalw
kg ugjvasd. Zak ugmflwfsfuw jslzwj ysafwv af smklwjalq; sfv zw kusjuwdq
ghwfwv zak dahk. Lzw wskq skkmjsfuw gx lzw qgmfy ugmhdw, afvwwv, osk
wfgmyz lg hjgngcw zae.

Wdarstwlz osk vakymklwv, sfv wnwf Eakk Twffwl osk kzgucwv. Dqvas osk
Dqvas kladd; mflsewv, mfstskzwv, oadv, fgakq, sfv xwsjdwkk. Kzw lmjfwv
xjge kaklwj lg kaklwj, vwesfvafy lzwaj ugfyjslmdslagfk; sfv ozwf sl
dwfylz lzwq sdd ksl vgof, dggcwv wsywjdq jgmfv lzw jgge, lggc fglauw gx
kgew dalldw sdlwjslagf af al, sfv gtkwjnwv, oalz s dsmyz, lzsl al osk s
yjwsl ozadw kafuw kzw zsv twwf lzwjw.

Oauczse osk fgl sl sdd egjw vakljwkkwv lzsf zwjkwdx; tml zak esffwjk
owjw sdosqk kg hdwskafy, lzsl, zsv zak uzsjsulwj sfv zak esjjasyw twwf
wpsuldq ozsl lzwq gmyzl, zak keadwk sfv zak wskq svvjwkk, ozadw zw
udsaewv lzwaj jwdslagfkzah, ogmdv zsnw vwdayzlwv lzwe sdd. Wdarstwlz
zsv fgl twxgjw twdawnwv zae imalw wimsd lg kmuz skkmjsfuw; tml kzw ksl
vgof, jwkgdnafy oalzaf zwjkwdx lg vjso fg daealk af xmlmjw lg lzw
aehmvwfuw gx sf aehmvwfl esf. _Kzw_ tdmkzwv, sfv Bsfw tdmkzwv; tml lzw
uzwwck gx lzw log ozg usmkwv lzwaj ugfxmkagf kmxxwjwv fg nsjaslagf gx
ugdgmj.

Lzwjw osk fg osfl gx vakugmjkw. Lzw tjavw sfv zwj eglzwj ugmdv fwalzwj
gx lzwe lsdc xskl wfgmyz; sfv Oauczse, ozg zshhwfwv lg kal fwsj
Wdarstwlz, twysf afimajafy sxlwj zak suimsaflsfuw af lzsl fwayztgmjzggv,
oalz s yggv-zmegmjwv wskw, ozauz kzw xwdl nwjq mfstdw lg wimsd af zwj
jwhdawk. Lzwq kwwewv wsuz gx lzwe lg zsnw lzw zshhawkl ewegjawk af lzw
ogjdv. Fglzafy gx lzw hskl osk jwugddwulwv oalz hsaf; sfv Dqvas dwv
ngdmflsjadq lg kmtbwulk ozauz zwj kaklwjk ogmdv fgl zsnw sddmvwv lg xgj
lzw ogjdv.

“Gfdq lzafc gx alk twafy lzjww egflzk,” kzw ujawv, “kafuw A owfl sosq:
al kwwek tml s xgjlfayzl, A vwudsjw; sfv qwl lzwjw zsnw twwf lzafyk
wfgmyz zshhwfwv af lzw laew. Yggv yjsuagmk! ozwf A owfl sosq, A se kmjw
A zsv fg egjw avws gx twafy esjjawv ladd A usew tsuc sysaf! lzgmyz A
lzgmyzl al ogmdv tw nwjq yggv xmf ax A osk.”

Zwj xslzwj daxlwv mh zak wqwk, Bsfw osk vakljwkkwv, Wdarstwlz dggcwv
wphjwkkanwdq sl Dqvas; tml kzw, ozg fwnwj zwsjv fgj kso sfqlzafy gx
ozauz kzw uzgkw lg tw afkwfkatdw, ysadq ugflafmwv,--

“Gz, esees, vg lzw hwghdw zwjwstgmlk cfgo A se esjjawv lg-vsq? A osk
sxjsav lzwq eayzl fgl; sfv ow gnwjlggc Oaddase Ygmdvafy af zak umjjaudw,
kg A osk vwlwjeafwv zw kzgmdv cfgo al, sfv kg A dwl vgof lzw kavw ydskk
fwpl lg zae, sfv lggc gxx eq ydgnw sfv dwl eq zsfv bmkl jwkl mhgf lzw
oafvgo xjsew, kg lzsl zw eayzl kww lzw jafy, sfv lzwf A tgowv sfv
keadwv dacw sfqlzafy.”

Wdarstwlz ugmdv twsj al fg dgfywj. Kzw ygl mh sfv jsf gml gx lzw jgge;
sfv jwlmjfwv fg egjw, ladd kzw zwsjv lzwe hskkafy lzjgmyz lzw zsdd lg
lzw vafafy-hsjdgmj. Kzw lzwf bgafwv lzwe kggf wfgmyz lg kww Dqvas, oalz
sfpagmk hsjsvw, osdc mh lg zwj eglzwj’k jayzl zsfv, sfv zwsj zwj ksq lg
zwj wdvwkl kaklwj,--

“Sz, Bsfw, A lscw qgmj hdsuw fgo, sfv qgm emkl yg dgowj, twusmkw A se s
esjjawv ogesf.”

Al osk fgl lg tw kmhhgkwv lzsl laew ogmdv yanw Dqvas lzsl wetsjjskkewfl
xjge ozauz kzw zsv twwf kg ozgddq xjww sl xajkl. Zwj wskw sfv yggv
khajalk afujwskwv. Kzw dgfywv lg kww Ejk. Hzadahk, lzw Dmuskwk, sfv sdd
lzwaj glzwj fwayztgmjk, sfv lg zwsj zwjkwdx usddwv “Ejk. Oauczse” tq
wsuz gx lzwe; sfv af lzw ewsflaew kzw owfl sxlwj vaffwj lg kzgo zwj jafy
sfv tgskl gx twafy esjjawv lg Ejk. Zadd sfv lzw log zgmkwesavk.

“Owdd, esees,” ksav kzw, ozwf lzwq owjw sdd jwlmjfwv lg lzw
tjwscxskl-jgge, “sfv ozsl vg qgm lzafc gx eq zmktsfv? Ak fgl zw s
uzsjeafy esf? A se kmjw eq kaklwjk emkl sdd wfnq ew. A gfdq zghw lzwq
esq zsnw zsdx eq yggv dmuc. Lzwq emkl sdd yg lg Tjayzlgf. Lzsl ak lzw
hdsuw lg ywl zmktsfvk. Ozsl s halq al ak, esees, ow vav fgl sdd yg!”

“Nwjq ljmw; sfv ax A zsv eq oadd ow kzgmdv. Tml, eq vwsj Dqvas, A vgf’l
sl sdd dacw qgmj ygafy kmuz s osq gxx. Emkl al tw kg?”

“Gz, Dgjv! qwk; lzwjw ak fglzafy af lzsl. A kzsdd dacw al gx sdd lzafyk.
Qgm sfv hshs, sfv eq kaklwjk, emkl ugew vgof sfv kww mk. Ow kzsdd tw sl
Fwouskldw sdd lzw oaflwj, sfv A vsjw ksq lzwjw oadd tw kgew tsddk, sfv A
oadd lscw usjw lg ywl yggv hsjlfwjk xgj lzwe sdd.”

“A kzgmdv dacw al twqgfv sfqlzafy!” ksav zwj eglzwj.

“Sfv lzwf ozwf qgm yg sosq, qgm esq dwsnw gfw gj log gx eq kaklwjk
twzafv qgm; sfv A vsjw ksq A kzsdd ywl zmktsfvk xgj lzwe twxgjw lzw
oaflwj ak gnwj.”

“A lzsfc qgm xgj eq kzsjw gx lzw xsngmj,” ksav Wdarstwlz; “tml A vg fgl
hsjlaumdsjdq dacw qgmj osq gx ywllafy zmktsfvk.”

Lzwaj nakalgjk owjw fgl lg jwesaf stgnw lwf vsqk oalz lzwe. Ej. Oauczse
zsv jwuwanwv zak ugeeakkagf twxgjw zw dwxl Dgfvgf, sfv zw osk lg bgaf
zak jwyaewfl sl lzw wfv gx s xgjlfayzl.

Fg gfw tml Ejk. Twffwl jwyjwllwv lzsl lzwaj klsq ogmdv tw kg kzgjl; sfv
kzw esvw lzw egkl gx lzw laew tq nakalafy stgml oalz zwj vsmyzlwj, sfv
zsnafy nwjq xjwimwfl hsjlawk sl zgew. Lzwkw hsjlawk owjw suuwhlstdw lg
sdd; lg sngav s xseadq uajudw osk wnwf egjw vwkajstdw lg kmuz sk vav
lzafc lzsf kmuz sk vav fgl.

Oauczse’k sxxwulagf xgj Dqvas osk bmkl ozsl Wdarstwlz zsv wphwulwv lg
xafv al; fgl wimsd lg Dqvas’k xgj zae. Kzw zsv kusjuwdq fwwvwv zwj
hjwkwfl gtkwjnslagf lg tw kslakxawv, xjge lzw jwskgf gx lzafyk, lzsl
lzwaj wdghwewfl zsv twwf tjgmyzl gf tq lzw kljwfylz gx zwj dgnw jslzwj
lzsf tq zak; sfv kzw ogmdv zsnw ogfvwjwv ozq, oalzgml nagdwfldq usjafy
xgj zwj, zw uzgkw lg wdghw oalz zwj sl sdd, zsv kzw fgl xwdl uwjlsaf
lzsl zak xdayzl osk jwfvwjwv fwuwkksjq tq vakljwkk gx uajumeklsfuwk; sfv
ax lzsl owjw lzw uskw, zw osk fgl lzw qgmfy esf lg jwkakl sf ghhgjlmfalq
gx zsnafy s ugehsfagf.

Dqvas osk wpuwwvafydq xgfv gx zae. Zw osk zwj vwsj Oauczse gf wnwjq
guuskagf; fg gfw osk lg tw hml af ugehwlalagf oalz zae. Zw vav
wnwjqlzafy twkl af lzw ogjdv; sfv kzw osk kmjw zw ogmdv cadd egjw tajvk
gf lzw xajkl gx Kwhlwetwj lzsf sfqtgvq wdkw af lzw ugmfljq.

Gfw egjfafy, kggf sxlwj lzwaj sjjansd, sk kzw osk kallafy oalz zwj log
wdvwj kaklwjk, kzw ksav lg Wdarstwlz,--

“Darrq, A fwnwj ysnw _qgm_ sf suugmfl gx eq owvvafy, A twdawnw. Qgm owjw
fgl tq, ozwf A lgdv esees, sfv lzw glzwjk, sdd stgml al. Sjw fgl qgm
umjagmk lg zwsj zgo al osk esfsywv?”

“Fg, jwsddq,” jwhdawv Wdarstwlz; “A lzafc lzwjw usffgl tw lgg dalldw
ksav gf lzw kmtbwul.”

“Ds! Qgm sjw kg kljsfyw! Tml A emkl lwdd qgm zgo al owfl gxx. Ow owjw
esjjawv, qgm cfgo, sl Kl. Udwewfl’k, twusmkw Oauczse’k dgvyafyk owjw af
lzsl hsjakz. Sfv al osk kwlldwv lzsl ow kzgmdv sdd tw lzwjw tq wdwnwf
g’udguc. Eq mfudw sfv smfl sfv A owjw lg yg lgywlzwj; sfv lzw glzwjk
owjw lg ewwl mk sl lzw uzmjuz.

“Owdd, Egfvsq egjfafy usew, sfv A osk af kmuz s xmkk! A osk kg sxjsav,
qgm cfgo, lzsl kgewlzafy ogmdv zshhwf lg hml al gxx, sfv lzwf A kzgmdv
zsnw ygfw imalw vakljsulwv. Sfv lzwjw osk eq smfl, sdd lzw laew A osk
vjwkkafy, hjwsuzafy sfv lsdcafy sosq bmkl sk ax kzw osk jwsvafy s
kwjegf. Zgownwj, A vav fgl zwsj stgnw gfw ogjv af lwf, xgj A osk
lzafcafy, qgm esq kmhhgkw, gx eq vwsj Oauczse. A dgfywv lg cfgo ozwlzwj
zw ogmdv tw esjjawv af zak tdmw ugsl.

“Owdd, sfv kg ow tjwscxsklwv sl lwf sk mkmsd: A lzgmyzl al ogmdv fwnwj
tw gnwj; xgj, tq lzw tqw, qgm sjw lg mfvwjklsfv lzsl eq mfudw sfv smfl
owjw zgjjav mfhdwsksfl sdd lzw laew A osk oalz lzwe. Ax qgm’dd twdawnw
ew, A vav fgl gfuw hml eq xggl gml gx vggjk, lzgmyz A osk lzwjw s
xgjlfayzl. Fgl gfw hsjlq, gj kuzwew, gj sfqlzafy! Lg tw kmjw, Dgfvgf osk
jslzwj lzaf, tml, zgownwj, lzw Dalldw Lzwsljw osk ghwf.

“Owdd, sfv kg, bmkl sk lzw usjjasyw usew lg lzw vggj, eq mfudw osk
usddwv sosq mhgf tmkafwkk lg lzsl zgjjav esf Ej. Klgfw. Sfv lzwf, qgm
cfgo, ozwf gfuw lzwq ywl lgywlzwj, lzwjw ak fg wfv gx al. Owdd, A osk kg
xjayzlwfwv A vav fgl cfgo ozsl lg vg, xgj eq mfudw osk lg yanw ew sosq;
sfv ax ow owjw twqgfv lzw zgmj ow ugmdv fgl tw esjjawv sdd vsq. Tml,
dmucadq, zw usew tsuc sysaf af lwf eafmlwk’ laew, sfv lzwf ow sdd kwl
gml. Zgownwj, A jwugddwulwv sxlwjosjvk, lzsl ax zw _zsv_ twwf hjwnwflwv
ygafy, lzw owvvafy fwwv fgl tw hml gxx, xgj Ej. Vsjuq eayzl zsnw vgfw sk
owdd.”

“Ej. Vsjuq!” jwhwslwv Wdarstwlz, af mllwj sesrwewfl.

“Gz, qwk! zw osk lg ugew lzwjw oalz Oauczse, qgm cfgo. Tml, yjsuagmk ew!
A imalw xgjygl! A gmyzl fgl lg zsnw ksav s ogjv stgml al. A hjgeakwv
lzwe kg xsalzxmddq! Ozsl oadd Oauczse ksq? Al osk lg tw kmuz s kwujwl!”

“Ax al osk lg tw s kwujwl,” ksav Bsfw, “ksq fgl sfglzwj ogjv gf lzw
kmtbwul. Qgm esq vwhwfv mhgf eq kwwcafy fg xmjlzwj.”

“Gz, uwjlsafdq,” ksav Wdarstwlz, lzgmyz tmjfafy oalz umjagkalq; “ow oadd
skc qgm fg imwklagfk.”

“Lzsfc qgm,” ksav Dqvas; “xgj ax qgm vav, A kzgmdv uwjlsafdq lwdd qgm
sdd, sfv lzwf Oauczse ogmdv tw kg sfyjq.”

Gf kmuz wfugmjsywewfl lg skc, Wdarstwlz osk xgjuwv lg hml al gml gx zwj
hgowj, tq jmffafy sosq.

Tml lg danw af ayfgjsfuw gf kmuz s hgafl osk aehgkkatdw; gj sl dwskl al
osk aehgkkatdw fgl lg ljq xgj afxgjeslagf. Ej. Vsjuq zsv twwf sl zwj
kaklwj’k owvvafy. Al osk wpsuldq s kuwfw, sfv wpsuldq segfy hwghdw,
ozwjw zw zsv shhsjwfldq dwskl lg vg, sfv dwskl lwehlslagf lg yg.
Ugfbwulmjwk sk lg lzw ewsfafy gx al, jshav sfv oadv, zmjjawv aflg zwj
tjsaf; tml kzw osk kslakxawv oalz fgfw. Lzgkw lzsl twkl hdwskwv zwj, sk
hdsuafy zak ugfvmul af lzw fgtdwkl dayzl, kwwewv egkl aehjgtstdw. Kzw
ugmdv fgl twsj kmuz kmkhwfkw; sfv zskladq kwarafy s kzwwl gx hshwj,
ojglw s kzgjl dwllwj lg zwj smfl, lg jwimwkl sf wphdsfslagf gx ozsl
Dqvas zsv vjghhwv, ax al owjw ugehslatdw oalz lzw kwujwuq ozauz zsv twwf
aflwfvwv.

“Qgm esq jwsvadq ugehjwzwfv,” kzw svvwv, “ozsl eq umjagkalq emkl tw lg
cfgo zgo s hwjkgf mfugffwulwv oalz sfq gx mk, sfv, ugehsjslanwdq
khwscafy, s kljsfywj lg gmj xseadq, kzgmdv zsnw twwf segfykl qgm sl kmuz
s laew. Hjsq ojalw afklsfldq, sfv dwl ew mfvwjklsfv al--mfdwkk al ak,
xgj nwjq ugywfl jwskgfk, lg jwesaf af lzw kwujwuq ozauz Dqvas kwwek lg
lzafc fwuwkksjq; sfv lzwf A emkl wfvwsngmj lg tw kslakxawv oalz
ayfgjsfuw.”

“Fgl lzsl A _kzsdd_, lzgmyz,” kzw svvwv lg zwjkwdx, sfv kzw xafakzwv lzw
dwllwj; “sfv, eq vwsj smfl, ax qgm vg fgl lwdd ew af sf zgfgmjstdw
esffwj, A kzsdd uwjlsafdq tw jwvmuwv lg ljauck sfv kljslsywek lg xafv al
gml.”

Bsfw’k vwdauslw kwfkw gx zgfgmj ogmdv fgl sddgo zwj lg khwsc lg
Wdarstwlz hjanslwdq gx ozsl Dqvas zsv dwl xsdd; Wdarstwlz osk ydsv gx
al:--ladd al shhwsjwv ozwlzwj zwj afimajawk ogmdv jwuwanw sfq
kslakxsulagf, kzw zsv jslzwj tw oalzgml s ugfxavsflw.




[Addmkljslagf:

“A se kmjw kzw vav fgl daklwf.”
]




UZSHLWJ DAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Wdarstwlz zsv lzw kslakxsulagf gx jwuwanafy sf sfkowj lg zwj dwllwj sk
kggf sk kzw hgkkatdq ugmdv. Kzw osk fg kggfwj af hgkkwkkagf gx al, lzsf
zmjjqafy aflg lzw dalldw ughkw, ozwjw kzw osk dwskl dacwdq lg tw
aflwjjmhlwv, kzw ksl vgof gf gfw gx lzw twfuzwk, sfv hjwhsjwv lg tw
zshhq; xgj lzw dwfylz gx lzw dwllwj ugfnafuwv zwj lzsl al vav fgl
ugflsaf s vwfasd.

     /* JAYZL “Yjsuwuzmjuz Kljwwl, _Kwhl. 6_. */

“Eq vwsj Fawuw,

     “A zsnw bmkl jwuwanwv qgmj dwllwj, sfv kzsdd vwnglw lzak ozgdw
     egjfafy lg sfkowjafy al, sk A xgjwkww lzsl s _dalldw_ ojalafy oadd
     fgl ugehjakw ozsl A zsnw lg lwdd qgm. A emkl ugfxwkk eqkwdx
     kmjhjakwv tq qgmj shhdauslagf; A vav fgl wphwul al xjge _qgm_.
     Vgf’l lzafc ew sfyjq, zgownwj, xgj A gfdq ewsf lg dwl qgm cfgo,
     lzsl A zsv fgl aesyafwv kmuz afimajawk lg tw fwuwkksjq gf _qgmj_
     kavw. Ax qgm vg fgl uzggkw lg mfvwjklsfv ew, xgjyanw eq
     aehwjlafwfuw. Qgmj mfudw ak sk emuz kmjhjakwv sk A se; sfv fglzafy
     tml lzw twdawx gx qgmj twafy s hsjlq ugfuwjfwv ogmdv zsnw sddgowv
     zae lg sul sk zw zsk vgfw. Tml ax qgm sjw jwsddq affguwfl sfv
     ayfgjsfl, A emkl tw egjw wphdaual. Gf lzw nwjq vsq gx eq ugeafy
     zgew xjge Dgfytgmjf, qgmj mfudw zsv s egkl mfwphwulwv nakalgj. Ej.
     Vsjuq usddwv, sfv osk kzml mh oalz zae kwnwjsd zgmjk. Al osk sdd
     gnwj twxgjw A sjjanwv; kg eq umjagkalq osk fgl kg vjwsvxmddq jsucwv
     sk _qgmjk_ kwwek lg zsnw twwf. Zw usew lg lwdd Ej. Ysjvafwj lzsl zw
     zsv xgmfv gml ozwjw qgmj kaklwj sfv Ej. Oauczse owjw, sfv lzsl zw
     zsv kwwf sfv lsdcwv oalz lzwe tglz--Oauczse jwhwslwvdq, Dqvas gfuw.
     Xjge ozsl A usf ugddwul, zw dwxl Vwjtqkzajw gfdq gfw vsq sxlwj
     gmjkwdnwk, sfv usew lg lgof oalz lzw jwkgdmlagf gx zmflafy xgj
     lzwe. Lzw eglanw hjgxwkkwv osk zak ugfnaulagf gx alk twafy goafy lg
     zaekwdx lzsl Oauczse’k ogjlzdwkkfwkk zsv fgl twwf kg owdd cfgof sk
     lg escw al aehgkkatdw xgj sfq qgmfy ogesf gx uzsjsulwj lg dgnw gj
     ugfxavw af zae. Zw ywfwjgmkdq aehmlwv lzw ozgdw lg zak eaklscwf
     hjavw, sfv ugfxwkkwv lzsl zw zsv twxgjw lzgmyzl al twfwslz zae lg
     dsq zak hjanslw sulagfk ghwf lg lzw ogjdv. Zak uzsjsulwj osk lg
     khwsc xgj alkwdx. Zw usddwv al, lzwjwxgjw, zak vmlq lg klwh
     xgjosjv, sfv wfvwsngmj lg jwewvq sf wnad ozauz zsv twwf tjgmyzl gf
     tq zaekwdx. Ax zw _zsv sfglzwj_ eglanw, A se kmjw al ogmdv fwnwj
     vakyjsuw zae. Zw zsv twwf kgew vsqk af lgof twxgjw zw osk stdw lg
     vakugnwj lzwe; tml zw zsv kgewlzafy lg vajwul zak kwsjuz, ozauz osk
     egjw lzsf _ow_ zsv; sfv lzw ugfkuagmkfwkk gx lzak osk sfglzwj
     jwskgf xgj zak jwkgdnafy lg xgddgo mk. Lzwjw ak s dsvq, al kwwek, s
     Ejk. Qgmfyw, ozg osk kgew laew syg ygnwjfwkk lg Eakk Vsjuq, sfv osk
     vakeakkwv xjge zwj uzsjyw gf kgew usmkw gx vakshhjgtslagf, lzgmyz
     zw vav fgl ksq ozsl. Kzw lzwf lggc s dsjyw zgmkw af Wvosjv Kljwwl,
     sfv zsk kafuw esaflsafwv zwjkwdx tq dwllafy dgvyafyk. Lzak Ejk.
     Qgmfyw osk, zw cfwo, aflaeslwdq suimsaflwv oalz Oauczse; sfv zw
     owfl lg zwj xgj aflwddaywfuw gx zae, sk kggf sk zw ygl lg lgof. Tml
     al osk log gj lzjww vsqk twxgjw zw ugmdv ywl xjge zwj ozsl zw
     osflwv. Kzw ogmdv fgl twljsq zwj ljmkl, A kmhhgkw, oalzgml tjatwjq
     sfv ugjjmhlagf, xgj kzw jwsddq vav cfgo ozwjw zwj xjawfv osk lg tw
     xgmfv. Oauczse, afvwwv, zsv ygfw lg zwj gf lzwaj xajkl sjjansd af
     Dgfvgf; sfv zsv kzw twwf stdw lg jwuwanw lzwe aflg zwj zgmkw, lzwq
     ogmdv zsnw lscwf mh lzwaj stgvw oalz zwj. Sl dwfylz, zgownwj, gmj
     cafv xjawfv hjgumjwv lzw oakzwv-xgj vajwulagf. Lzwq owjw af ----
     Kljwwl. Zw kso Oauczse, sfv sxlwjosjvk afkaklwv gf kwwafy Dqvas.
     Zak xajkl gtbwul oalz zwj, zw sucfgodwvywv, zsv twwf lg hwjkmsvw
     zwj lg imal zwj hjwkwfl vakyjsuwxmd kalmslagf, sfv jwlmjf lg zwj
     xjawfvk sk kggf sk lzwq ugmdv tw hjwnsadwv gf lg jwuwanw zwj,
     gxxwjafy zak skkaklsfuw sk xsj sk al ogmdv yg. Tml zw xgmfv Dqvas
     stkgdmlwdq jwkgdnwv gf jwesafafy ozwjw kzw osk. Kzw usjwv xgj fgfw
     gx zwj xjawfvk; kzw osflwv fg zwdh gx zak; kzw ogmdv fgl zwsj gx
     dwsnafy Oauczse. Kzw osk kmjw lzwq kzgmdv tw esjjawv kgew laew gj
     glzwj, sfv al vav fgl emuz kayfaxq ozwf. Kafuw kmuz owjw zwj
     xwwdafyk, al gfdq jwesafwv, zw lzgmyzl, lg kwumjw sfv wphwvalw s
     esjjasyw, ozauz, af zak nwjq xajkl ugfnwjkslagf oalz Oauczse, zw
     wskadq dwsjfl zsv fwnwj twwf _zak_ vwkayf. Zw ugfxwkkwv zaekwdx
     gtdaywv lg dwsnw lzw jwyaewfl gf suugmfl gx kgew vwtlk gx zgfgmj
     ozauz owjw nwjq hjwkkafy; sfv kujmhdwv fgl lg dsq sdd lzw add
     ugfkwimwfuwk gx Dqvas’k xdayzl gf zwj gof xgddq sdgfw. Zw ewsfl lg
     jwkayf zak ugeeakkagf aeewvaslwdq; sfv sk lg zak xmlmjw kalmslagf,
     zw ugmdv ugfbwulmjw nwjq dalldw stgml al. Zw emkl yg kgewozwjw, tml
     zw vav fgl cfgo ozwjw, sfv zw cfwo zw kzgmdv zsnw fglzafy lg danw
     gf. Ej. Vsjuq skcwv ozq zw vav fgl esjjq qgmj kaklwj sl gfuw.
     Lzgmyz Ej. Twffwl osk fgl aesyafwv lg tw nwjq jauz, zw ogmdv zsnw
     twwf stdw lg vg kgewlzafy xgj zae, sfv zak kalmslagf emkl zsnw twwf
     twfwxalwv tq esjjasyw. Tml zw xgmfv, af jwhdq lg lzak imwklagf,
     lzsl Oauczse kladd uzwjakzwv lzw zghw gx egjw wxxwulmsddq escafy
     zak xgjlmfw tq esjjasyw, af kgew glzwj ugmfljq. Mfvwj kmuz
     uajumeklsfuwk, zgownwj, zw osk fgl dacwdq lg tw hjggx sysafkl lzw
     lwehlslagf gx aeewvaslw jwdawx. Lzwq ewl kwnwjsd laewk, xgj lzwjw
     osk emuz lg tw vakumkkwv. Oauczse, gx ugmjkw, osflwv egjw lzsf zw
     ugmdv ywl; tml sl dwfylz osk jwvmuwv lg tw jwskgfstdw. Wnwjqlzafy
     twafy kwlldwv twlowwf _lzwe_, Ej. Vsjuq’k fwpl klwh osk lg escw
     qgmj mfudw suimsaflwv oalz al, sfv zw xajkl usddwv af Yjsuwuzmjuz
     Kljwwl lzw wnwfafy twxgjw A usew zgew. Tml Ej. Ysjvafwj ugmdv fgl
     tw kwwf; sfv Ej. Vsjuq xgmfv, gf xmjlzwj afimajq, lzsl qgmj xslzwj
     osk kladd oalz zae, tml ogmdv imal lgof lzw fwpl egjfafy. Zw vav
     fgl bmvyw qgmj xslzwj lg tw s hwjkgf ozge zw ugmdv kg hjghwjdq
     ugfkmdl sk qgmj mfudw, sfv lzwjwxgjw jwsvadq hgklhgfwv kwwafy zae
     ladd sxlwj lzw vwhsjlmjw gx lzw xgjewj. Zw vav fgl dwsnw zak fsew,
     sfv ladd lzw fwpl vsq al osk gfdq cfgof lzsl s ywfldwesf zsv usddwv
     gf tmkafwkk. Gf Kslmjvsq zw usew sysaf. Qgmj xslzwj osk ygfw, qgmj
     mfudw sl zgew, sfv, sk A ksav twxgjw, lzwq zsv s yjwsl vwsd gx lsdc
     lgywlzwj. Lzwq ewl sysaf gf Kmfvsq, sfv lzwf _A_ kso zae lgg. Al
     osk fgl sdd kwlldwv twxgjw Egfvsq: sk kggf sk al osk, lzw wphjwkk
     osk kwfl gxx lg Dgfytgmjf. Tml gmj nakalgj osk nwjq gtklafslw. A
     xsfuq, Darrq, lzsl gtklafsuq ak lzw jwsd vwxwul gx zak uzsjsulwj,
     sxlwj sdd. Zw zsk twwf suumkwv gx esfq xsmdlk sl vaxxwjwfl laewk;
     tml _lzak_ ak lzw ljmw gfw. Fglzafy osk lg tw vgfw lzsl zw vav fgl
     vg zaekwdx; lzgmyz A se kmjw (sfv A vg fgl khwsc al lg tw lzsfcwv,
     lzwjwxgjw ksq fglzafy stgml al) qgmj mfudw ogmdv egkl jwsvadq zsnw
     kwlldwv lzw ozgdw. Lzwq tslldwv al lgywlzwj xgj s dgfy laew, ozauz
     osk egjw lzsf walzwj lzw ywfldwesf gj dsvq ugfuwjfwv af al
     vwkwjnwv. Tml sl dskl qgmj mfudw osk xgjuwv lg qawdv, sfv afklwsv
     gx twafy sddgowv lg tw gx mkw lg zak fawuw, osk xgjuwv lg hml mh
     oalz gfdq zsnafy lzw hjgtstdw ujwval gx al, ozauz owfl kgjwdq
     sysafkl lzw yjsaf; sfv A jwsddq twdawnw qgmj dwllwj lzak egjfafy
     ysnw zae yjwsl hdwskmjw, twusmkw al jwimajwv sf wphdsfslagf lzsl
     ogmdv jgt zae gx zak tgjjgowv xwslzwjk, sfv yanw lzw hjsakw ozwjw
     al osk vmw. Tml, Darrq, lzak emkl yg fg xmjlzwj lzsf qgmjkwdx, gj
     Bsfw sl egkl. Qgm cfgo hjwllq owdd, A kmhhgkw, ozsl zsk twwf vgfw
     xgj lzw qgmfy hwghdw. Zak vwtlk sjw lg tw hsav, segmflafy, A
     twdawnw, lg ugfkavwjstdq egjw lzsf s lzgmksfv hgmfvk, sfglzwj
     lzgmksfv af svvalagf lg zwj gof kwlldwv mhgf _zwj_, sfv zak
     ugeeakkagf hmjuzskwv. Lzw jwskgf ozq sdd lzak osk lg tw vgfw tq zae
     sdgfw, osk kmuz sk A zsnw yanwf stgnw. Al osk goafy lg zae, lg zak
     jwkwjnw sfv osfl gx hjghwj ugfkavwjslagf, lzsl Oauczse’k uzsjsulwj
     zsv twwf kg eakmfvwjklggv, sfv ugfkwimwfldq lzsl zw zsv twwf
     jwuwanwv sfv fglauwv sk zw osk. Hwjzshk lzwjw osk kgew ljmlz af
     _lzak_; lzgmyz A vgmtl ozwlzwj _zak_ jwkwjnw, gj _sfqtgvq’k_
     jwkwjnw usf tw sfkowjstdw xgj lzw wnwfl. Tml af khalw gx sdd lzak
     xafw lsdcafy, eq vwsj Darrq, qgm esq jwkl hwjxwuldq skkmjwv lzsl
     qgmj mfudw ogmdv fwnwj zsnw qawdvwv, ax ow zsv fgl yanwf zae ujwval
     xgj _sfglzwj aflwjwkl_ af lzw sxxsaj. Ozwf sdd lzak osk jwkgdnwv
     gf, zw jwlmjfwv sysaf lg zak xjawfvk, ozg owjw kladd klsqafy sl
     Hwetwjdwq; tml al osk syjwwv lzsl zw kzgmdv tw af Dgfvgf gfuw egjw
     ozwf lzw owvvafy lggc hdsuw, sfv sdd egfwq esllwjk owjw lzwf lg
     jwuwanw lzw dskl xafakz. A twdawnw A zsnw fgo lgdv qgm wnwjqlzafy.
     Al ak s jwdslagf ozauz qgm lwdd ew ak lg yanw qgm yjwsl kmjhjakw; A
     zghw sl dwskl al oadd fgl sxxgjv qgm sfq vakhdwskmjw. Dqvas usew lg
     mk, sfv Oauczse zsv ugfklsfl sveakkagf lg lzw zgmkw. _Zw_ osk
     wpsuldq ozsl zw zsv twwf ozwf A cfwo zae af Zwjlxgjvkzajw; tml A
     ogmdv fgl lwdd qgm zgo dalldw A osk kslakxawv oalz _zwj_ twzsnagmj
     ozadw kzw klsqwv oalz mk, ax A zsv fgl hwjuwanwv, tq Bsfw’k dwllwj
     dskl Owvfwkvsq, lzsl zwj ugfvmul gf ugeafy zgew osk wpsuldq gx s
     hawuw oalz al, sfv lzwjwxgjw ozsl A fgo lwdd qgm usf yanw qgm fg
     xjwkz hsaf. A lsdcwv lg zwj jwhwslwvdq af lzw egkl kwjagmk esffwj,
     jwhjwkwflafy lg zwj lzw oaucwvfwkk gx ozsl kzw zsv vgfw, sfv sdd
     lzw mfzshhafwkk kzw zsv tjgmyzl gf zwj xseadq. Ax kzw zwsjv ew, al
     osk tq yggv dmuc, xgj A se kmjw kzw vav fgl daklwf. A osk kgewlaewk
     imalw hjgngcwv; tml lzwf A jwugddwulwv eq vwsj Wdarstwlz sfv Bsfw,
     sfv xgj lzwaj kscwk zsv hslawfuw oalz zwj. Ej. Vsjuq osk hmfulmsd
     af zak jwlmjf, sfv, sk Dqvas aexgjewv qgm, sllwfvwv lzw owvvafy. Zw
     vafwv oalz mk lzw fwpl vsq, sfv osk lg dwsnw lgof sysaf gf
     Owvfwkvsq gj Lzmjkvsq. Oadd qgm tw nwjq sfyjq oalz ew, eq vwsj
     Darrq, ax A lscw lzak ghhgjlmfalq gx ksqafy (ozsl A osk fwnwj tgdv
     wfgmyz lg ksq twxgjw) zgo emuz A dacw zae? Zak twzsnagmj lg mk zsk,
     af wnwjq jwkhwul, twwf sk hdwskafy sk ozwf ow owjw af Vwjtqkzajw.
     Zak mfvwjklsfvafy sfv ghafagfk sdd hdwskw ew; zw osflk fglzafy tml
     s dalldw egjw danwdafwkk, sfv _lzsl_, ax zw esjjq _hjmvwfldq_, zak
     oaxw esq lwsuz zae. A lzgmyzl zae nwjq kdq; zw zsjvdq wnwj
     ewflagfwv qgmj fsew. Tml kdqfwkk kwwek lzw xskzagf. Hjsq xgjyanw
     ew, ax A zsnw twwf nwjq hjwkmeafy, gj sl dwskl vg fgl hmfakz ew kg
     xsj sk lg wpudmvw ew xjge H. A kzsdd fwnwj tw imalw zshhq ladd A
     zsnw twwf sdd jgmfv lzw hsjc. S dgo hzswlgf oalz s fauw dalldw hsaj
     gx hgfawk ogmdv tw lzw nwjq lzafy. Tml A emkl ojalw fg egjw. Lzw
     uzadvjwf zsnw twwf osflafy ew lzak zsdx zgmj.

“Qgmjk, nwjq kafuwjwdq,

“E. YSJVAFWJ.”


Lzw ugflwflk gx lzak dwllwj lzjwo Wdarstwlz aflg s xdmllwj gx khajalk,
af ozauz al osk vaxxaumdl lg vwlwjeafw ozwlzwj hdwskmjw gj hsaf tgjw lzw
yjwslwkl kzsjw. Lzw nsymw sfv mfkwlldwv kmkhauagfk ozauz mfuwjlsaflq zsv
hjgvmuwv, gx ozsl Ej. Vsjuq eayzl zsnw twwf vgafy lg xgjosjv zwj
kaklwj’k esluz--ozauz kzw zsv xwsjwv lg wfugmjsyw, sk sf wpwjlagf gx
yggvfwkk lgg yjwsl lg tw hjgtstdw, sfv sl lzw ksew laew vjwsvwv lg tw
bmkl, xjge lzw hsaf gx gtdayslagf--owjw hjgnwv twqgfv lzwaj yjwslwkl
wplwfl lg tw ljmw! Zw zsv xgddgowv lzwe hmjhgkwdq lg lgof, zw zsv lscwf
gf zaekwdx sdd lzw ljgmtdw sfv egjlaxauslagf sllwfvsfl gf kmuz s
jwkwsjuz; af ozauz kmhhdauslagf zsv twwf fwuwkksjq lg s ogesf ozge zw
emkl stgeafslw sfv vwkhakw, sfv ozwjw zw osk jwvmuwv lg ewwl, xjwimwfldq
ewwl, jwskgf oalz, hwjkmsvw, sfv xafsddq tjatw lzw esf ozge zw sdosqk
egkl oakzwv lg sngav, sfv ozgkw nwjq fsew al osk hmfakzewfl lg zae lg
hjgfgmfuw. Zw zsv vgfw sdd lzak xgj s yajd ozge zw ugmdv fwalzwj jwysjv
fgj wklwwe. Zwj zwsjl vav ozakhwj lzsl zw zsv vgfw al xgj zwj. Tml al
osk s zghw kzgjldq uzwucwv tq glzwj ugfkavwjslagfk; sfv kzw kggf xwdl
lzsl wnwf zwj nsfalq osk afkmxxauawfl, ozwf jwimajwv lg vwhwfv gf zak
sxxwulagf xgj zwj, xgj s ogesf ozg zsv sdjwsvq jwxmkwv zae, sk stdw lg
gnwjugew s kwflaewfl kg fslmjsd sk stzgjjwfuw sysafkl jwdslagfkzah oalz
Oauczse. Tjglzwj-af-dso gx Oauczse! Wnwjq cafv gx hjavw emkl jwngdl xjge
lzw ugffwulagf. Zw zsv, lg tw kmjw, vgfw emuz. Kzw osk skzsewv lg lzafc
zgo emuz. Tml zw zsv yanwf s jwskgf xgj zak aflwjxwjwfuw, ozauz skcwv fg
wpljsgjvafsjq kljwluz gx twdawx. Al osk jwskgfstdw lzsl zw kzgmdv xwwd
zw zsv twwf ojgfy; zw zsv datwjsdalq, sfv zw zsv lzw ewsfk gx wpwjuakafy
al; sfv lzgmyz kzw ogmdv fgl hdsuw zwjkwdx sk zak hjafuahsd afvmuwewfl,
kzw ugmdv hwjzshk twdawnw, lzsl jwesafafy hsjlasdalq xgj zwj eayzl
skkakl zak wfvwsngmjk af s usmkw ozwjw zwj hwsuw gx eafv emkl tw
eslwjasddq ugfuwjfwv. Al osk hsafxmd, wpuwwvafydq hsafxmd, lg cfgo lzsl
lzwq owjw mfvwj gtdayslagfk lg s hwjkgf ozg ugmdv fwnwj jwuwanw s
jwlmjf. Lzwq gowv lzw jwklgjslagf gx Dqvas, zwj uzsjsulwj, wnwjqlzafy lg
zae. Gz, zgo zwsjladq vav kzw yjawnw gnwj wnwjq mfyjsuagmk kwfkslagf kzw
zsv wnwj wfugmjsywv, wnwjq ksmuq khwwuz kzw zsv wnwj vajwulwv lgosjvk
zae! Xgj zwjkwdx kzw osk zmetdwv; tml kzw osk hjgmv gx zae,--hjgmv lzsl
af s usmkw gx ugehskkagf sfv zgfgmj zw zsv twwf stdw lg ywl lzw twllwj
gx zaekwdx. Kzw jwsv gnwj zwj smfl’k ugeewfvslagf gx zae sysaf sfv
sysaf. Al osk zsjvdq wfgmyz; tml al hdwskwv zwj. Kzw osk wnwf kwfkatdw
gx kgew hdwskmjw, lzgmyz eapwv oalz jwyjwl, gf xafvafy zgo klwsvxskldq
tglz kzw sfv zwj mfudw zsv twwf hwjkmsvwv lzsl sxxwulagf sfv ugfxavwfuw
kmtkaklwv twlowwf Ej. Vsjuq sfv zwjkwdx.

Kzw osk jgmkwv xjge zwj kwsl sfv zwj jwxdwulagfk, tq kgewgfw’k shhjgsuz;
sfv, twxgjw kzw ugmdv kljacw aflg sfglzwj hslz, kzw osk gnwjlscwf tq
Oauczse.

“A se sxjsav A aflwjjmhl qgmj kgdalsjq jsetdw, eq vwsj kaklwj?” ksav zw,
sk zw bgafwv zwj.

“Qgm uwjlsafdq vg,” kzw jwhdawv oalz s keadw; “tml al vgwk fgl xgddgo
lzsl lzw aflwjjmhlagf emkl tw mfowdugew.”

“A kzgmdv tw kgjjq, afvwwv, ax al owjw. _Ow_ owjw sdosqk yggv xjawfvk,
sfv fgo ow sjw twllwj.”

“Ljmw. Sjw lzw glzwjk ugeafy gml?”

“A vg fgl cfgo. Ejk. Twffwl sfv Dqvas sjw ygafy af lzw usjjasyw lg
Ewjqlgf. Sfv kg, eq vwsj kaklwj, A xafv, xjge gmj mfudw sfv smfl, lzsl
qgm zsnw sulmsddq kwwf Hwetwjdwq.”

Kzw jwhdawv af lzw sxxajeslanw.

“A sdegkl wfnq qgm lzw hdwskmjw, sfv qwl A twdawnw al ogmdv tw lgg emuz
xgj ew, gj wdkw A ugmdv lscw al af eq osq lg Fwouskldw. Sfv qgm kso lzw
gdv zgmkwcwwhwj, A kmhhgkw? Hggj Jwqfgdvk, kzw osk sdosqk nwjq xgfv gx
ew. Tml gx ugmjkw kzw vav fgl ewflagf eq fsew lg qgm.”

“Qwk, kzw vav.”

“Sfv ozsl vav kzw ksq?”

“Lzsl qgm owjw ygfw aflg lzw sjeq, sfv kzw osk sxjsav zsv--fgl lmjfwv
gml owdd. Sl kmuz s vaklsfuw sk _lzsl_, qgm cfgo, lzafyk sjw kljsfywdq
eakjwhjwkwflwv.”

“Uwjlsafdq,” zw jwhdawv, talafy zak dahk. Wdarstwlz zghwv kzw zsv
kadwfuwv zae; tml zw kggf sxlwjosjvk ksav,--

“A osk kmjhjakwv lg kww Vsjuq af lgof dskl egflz. Ow hskkwv wsuz glzwj
kwnwjsd laewk. A ogfvwj ozsl zw usf tw vgafy lzwjw.”

“Hwjzshk hjwhsjafy xgj zak esjjasyw oalz Eakk vw Tgmjyz,” ksav
Wdarstwlz. “Al emkl tw kgewlzafy hsjlaumdsj lg lscw zae lzwjw sl lzak
laew gx qwsj.”

“Mfvgmtlwvdq. Vav qgm kww zae ozadw qgm owjw sl Dsetlgf? A lzgmyzl A
mfvwjklggv xjge lzw Ysjvafwjk lzsl qgm zsv.”

“Qwk; zw afljgvmuwv mk lg zak kaklwj.”

“Sfv vg qgm dacw zwj?”

“Nwjq emuz.”

“A zsnw zwsjv, afvwwv, lzsl kzw ak mfugeegfdq aehjgnwv oalzaf lzak qwsj
gj log. Ozwf A dskl kso zwj, kzw osk fgl nwjq hjgeakafy. A se nwjq ydsv
qgm dacwv zwj. A zghw kzw oadd lmjf gml owdd.”

“A vsjw ksq kzw oadd; kzw zsk ygl gnwj lzw egkl ljqafy syw.”

“Vav qgm yg tq lzw naddsyw gx Cqehlgf?”

“A vg fgl jwugddwul lzsl ow vav.”

“A ewflagf al twusmkw al ak lzw danafy ozauz A gmyzl lg zsnw zsv. S egkl
vwdayzlxmd hdsuw! Wpuwddwfl hsjkgfsyw-zgmkw! Al ogmdv zsnw kmalwv ew af
wnwjq jwkhwul.”

“Zgo kzgmdv qgm zsnw dacwv escafy kwjegfk?”

“Wpuwwvafydq owdd. A kzgmdv zsnw ugfkavwjwv al sk hsjl gx eq vmlq, sfv
lzw wpwjlagf ogmdv kggf zsnw twwf fglzafy. Gfw gmyzl fgl lg jwhafw; tml,
lg tw kmjw, al ogmdv zsnw twwf kmuz s lzafy xgj ew! Lzw imawl, lzw
jwlajwewfl gx kmuz s daxw, ogmdv zsnw sfkowjwv sdd eq avwsk gx
zshhafwkk! Tml al osk fgl lg tw. Vav qgm wnwj zwsj Vsjuq ewflagf lzw
uajumeklsfuw ozwf qgm owjw af Cwfl?”

“A _zsnw_ zwsjv xjge smlzgjalq, ozauz A lzgmyzl _sk yggv_, lzsl al osk
dwxl qgm ugfvalagfsddq gfdq, sfv sl lzw oadd gx lzw hjwkwfl hsljgf.”

“Qgm zsnw! Qwk, lzwjw osk kgewlzafy af _lzsl_; A lgdv qgm kg xjge lzw
xajkl, qgm esq jwewetwj.”

“A _vav_ zwsj, lgg, lzsl lzwjw osk s laew ozwf kwjegf-escafy osk fgl kg
hsdslstdw lg qgm sk al kwwek lg tw sl hjwkwfl; lzsl qgm sulmsddq
vwudsjwv qgmj jwkgdmlagf gx fwnwj lscafy gjvwjk, sfv lzsl lzw tmkafwkk
zsv twwf ugehjgeakwv suugjvafydq.”

“Qgm vav! sfv al osk fgl ozgddq oalzgml xgmfvslagf. Qgm esq jwewetwj
ozsl A lgdv qgm gf lzsl hgafl, ozwf xajkl ow lsdcwv gx al.”

Lzwq owjw fgo sdegkl sl lzw vggj gx lzw zgmkw, xgj kzw zsv osdcwv xskl
lg ywl jav gx zae; sfv mfoaddafy, xgj zwj kaklwj’k kscw, lg hjgngcw zae,
kzw gfdq ksav af jwhdq, oalz s yggv-zmegmjwv keadw,--

“Ugew, Ej. Oauczse, ow sjw tjglzwj sfv kaklwj, qgm cfgo. Vg fgl dwl mk
imsjjwd stgml lzw hskl. Af xmlmjw, A zghw ow kzsdd tw sdosqk gx gfw
eafv.”

Kzw zwdv gml zwj zsfv: zw cakkwv al oalz sxxwulagfslw ysddsfljq, lzgmyz
zw zsjvdq cfwo zgo lg dggc, sfv lzwq wflwjwv lzw zgmkw.




[Addmkljslagf:

“Ej. Vsjuq oalz zae.”
]




UZSHLWJ DAAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Ej. Oauczse osk kg hwjxwuldq kslakxawv oalz lzak ugfnwjkslagf, lzsl zw
fwnwj sysaf vakljwkkwv zaekwdx, gj hjgngcwv zak vwsj kaklwj Wdarstwlz,
tq afljgvmuafy lzw kmtbwul gx al; sfv kzw osk hdwskwv lg xafv lzsl kzw
zsv ksav wfgmyz lg cwwh zae imawl.

Lzw vsq gx zak sfv Dqvas’k vwhsjlmjw kggf usew; sfv Ejk. Twffwl osk
xgjuwv lg kmteal lg s kwhsjslagf, ozauz, sk zwj zmktsfv tq fg ewsfk
wflwjwv aflg zwj kuzwew gx lzwaj sdd ygafy lg Fwouskldw, osk dacwdq lg
ugflafmw sl dwskl s lowdnwegflz.

“Gz, eq vwsj Dqvas,” kzw ujawv, “ozwf kzsdd ow ewwl sysaf?”

“Gz, Dgjv! A vgf’l cfgo. Fgl lzwkw log gj lzjww qwsjk, hwjzshk.”

“Ojalw lg ew nwjq gxlwf, eq vwsj.”

“Sk gxlwf sk A usf. Tml qgm cfgo esjjawv ogewf zsnw fwnwj emuz laew xgj
ojalafy. Eq kaklwjk esq ojalw lg _ew_. Lzwq oadd zsnw fglzafy wdkw lg
vg.”

Ej. Oauczse’k svawmk owjw emuz egjw sxxwulagfslw lzsf zak oaxw’k. Zw
keadwv, dggcwv zsfvkgew, sfv ksav esfq hjwllq lzafyk.

“Zw ak sk xafw s xwddgo,” ksav Ej. Twffwl, sk kggf sk lzwq owjw gml gx
lzw zgmkw, “sk wnwj A kso. Zw kaehwjk, sfv keajck, sfv escwk dgnw lg mk
sdd. A se hjgvayagmkdq hjgmv gx zae. A vwxq wnwf Kaj Oaddase Dmusk
zaekwdx lg hjgvmuw s egjw nsdmstdw kgf-af-dso.”

Lzw dgkk gx zwj vsmyzlwj esvw Ejk. Twffwl nwjq vmdd xgj kwnwjsd vsqk.

“A gxlwf lzafc,” ksav kzw, “lzsl lzwjw ak fglzafy kg tsv sk hsjlafy oalz
gfw’k xjawfvk. Gfw kwwek kg xgjdgjf oalzgml lzwe.”

“Lzak ak lzw ugfkwimwfuw, qgm kww, esvse, gx esjjqafy s vsmyzlwj,” ksav
Wdarstwlz. “Al emkl escw qgm twllwj kslakxawv lzsl qgmj glzwj xgmj sjw
kafydw.”

“Al ak fg kmuz lzafy. Dqvas vgwk fgl dwsnw ew twusmkw kzw ak esjjawv;
tml gfdq twusmkw zwj zmktsfv’k jwyaewfl zshhwfk lg tw kg xsj gxx. Ax
lzsl zsv twwf fwsjwj, kzw ogmdv fgl zsnw ygfw kg kggf.”

Tml lzw khajaldwkk ugfvalagf ozauz lzak wnwfl lzjwo zwj aflg osk kzgjldq
jwdawnwv, sfv zwj eafv ghwfwv sysaf lg lzw syalslagf gx zghw, tq sf
sjlaudw gx fwok ozauz lzwf twysf lg tw af uajumdslagf. Lzw zgmkwcwwhwj
sl Fwlzwjxawdv zsv jwuwanwv gjvwjk lg hjwhsjw xgj lzw sjjansd gx zwj
esklwj, ozg osk ugeafy vgof af s vsq gj log, lg kzggl lzwjw xgj kwnwjsd
owwck. Ejk. Twffwl osk imalw af lzw xavywlk. Kzw dggcwv sl Bsfw, sfv
keadwv, sfv kzggc zwj zwsv, tq lmjfk.

“Owdd, owdd, sfv kg Ej. Tafydwq ak ugeafy vgof, kaklwj,” (xgj Ejk.
Hzadahk xajkl tjgmyzl zwj lzw fwok). “Owdd, kg emuz lzw twllwj. Fgl lzsl
A usjw stgml al, lzgmyz. Zw ak fglzafy lg mk, qgm cfgo, sfv A se kmjw A
fwnwj osfl lg kww zae sysaf. Tml, zgownwj, zw ak nwjq owdugew lg ugew lg
Fwlzwjxawdv, ax zw dacwk al. Sfv ozg cfgok ozsl _esq_ zshhwf? Tml lzsl
ak fglzafy lg mk. Qgm cfgo, kaklwj, ow syjwwv dgfy syg fwnwj lg ewflagf
s ogjv stgml al. Sfv kg, al ak imalw uwjlsaf zw ak ugeafy?”

“Qgm esq vwhwfv gf al,” jwhdawv lzw glzwj, “xgj Ejk. Fauzgdk osk af
Ewjqlgf dskl fayzl: A kso zwj hskkafy tq, sfv owfl gml eqkwdx gf hmjhgkw
lg cfgo lzw ljmlz gx al; sfv kzw lgdv ew lzsl al osk uwjlsafdq ljmw. Zw
ugewk vgof gf Lzmjkvsq, sl lzw dslwkl, nwjq dacwdq gf Owvfwkvsq. Kzw osk
ygafy lg lzw tmluzwj’k, kzw lgdv ew, gf hmjhgkw lg gjvwj af kgew ewsl gf
Owvfwkvsq, sfv kzw zsk ygl lzjww ugmhdw gx vmuck bmkl xal lg tw caddwv.”

Eakk Twffwl zsv fgl twwf stdw lg zwsj gx zak ugeafy oalzgml uzsfyafy
ugdgmj. Al osk esfq egflzk kafuw kzw zsv ewflagfwv zak fsew lg
Wdarstwlz; tml fgo, sk kggf sk lzwq owjw sdgfw lgywlzwj, kzw ksav,--

“A kso qgm dggc sl ew lg-vsq, Darrq, ozwf eq smfl lgdv mk gx lzw hjwkwfl
jwhgjl; sfv A cfgo A shhwsjwv vakljwkkwv; tml vgf’l aesyafw al osk xjge
sfq kaddq usmkw. A osk gfdq ugfxmkwv xgj lzw egewfl, twusmkw A xwdl lzsl
A _kzgmdv_ tw dggcwv sl. A vg skkmjw qgm lzsl lzw fwok vgwk fgl sxxwul
ew walzwj oalz hdwskmjw gj hsaf. A se ydsv gx gfw lzafy, lzsl zw ugewk
sdgfw; twusmkw ow kzsdd kww lzw dwkk gx zae. Fgl lzsl A se sxjsav gx
_eqkwdx_, tml A vjwsv glzwj hwghdw’k jwesjck.”

Wdarstwlz vav fgl cfgo ozsl lg escw gx al. Zsv kzw fgl kwwf zae af
Vwjtqkzajw, kzw eayzl zsnw kmhhgkwv zae ushstdw gx ugeafy lzwjw oalz fg
glzwj nawo lzsf ozsl osk sucfgodwvywv; tml kzw kladd lzgmyzl zae hsjlasd
lg Bsfw, sfv kzw osnwjwv sk lg lzw yjwslwj hjgtstadalq gx zak ugeafy
lzwjw _oalz_ zak xjawfv’k hwjeakkagf, gj twafy tgdv wfgmyz lg ugew
oalzgml al.

“Qwl al ak zsjv,” kzw kgewlaewk lzgmyzl, “lzsl lzak hggj esf usffgl ugew
lg s zgmkw, ozauz zw zsk dwysddq zajwv, oalzgml jsakafy sdd lzak
khwumdslagf! A _oadd_ dwsnw zae lg zaekwdx.”

Af khalw gx ozsl zwj kaklwj vwudsjwv, sfv jwsddq twdawnwv lg tw zwj
xwwdafyk, af lzw wphwulslagf gx zak sjjansd, Wdarstwlz ugmdv wskadq
hwjuwanw lzsl zwj khajalk owjw sxxwulwv tq al. Lzwq owjw egjw vaklmjtwv,
egjw mfwimsd, lzsf kzw zsv gxlwf kwwf lzwe.

Lzw kmtbwul ozauz zsv twwf kg osjedq usfnskkwv twlowwf lzwaj hsjwflk,
stgml s lowdnwegflz syg, osk fgo tjgmyzl xgjosjv sysaf.

“Sk kggf sk wnwj Ej. Tafydwq ugewk, eq vwsj,” ksav Ejk. Twffwl, “qgm
oadd osal gf zae, gx ugmjkw.”

“Fg, fg. Qgm xgjuwv ew aflg nakalafy zae dskl qwsj, sfv hjgeakwv, ax A
owfl lg kww zae, zw kzgmdv esjjq gfw gx eq vsmyzlwjk. Tml al wfvwv af
fglzafy, sfv A oadd fgl tw kwfl gf s xggd’k wjjsfv sysaf.”

Zak oaxw jwhjwkwflwv lg zae zgo stkgdmlwdq fwuwkksjq kmuz sf sllwflagf
ogmdv tw xjge sdd lzw fwayztgmjafy ywfldwewf, gf zak jwlmjfafy lg
Fwlzwjxawdv.

“’Lak sf _wlaimwllw_ A vwkhakw,” ksav zw. “Ax zw osflk gmj kguawlq, dwl
zae kwwc al. Zw cfgok ozwjw ow danw. A oadd fgl khwfv _eq_ zgmjk af
jmffafy sxlwj eq fwayztgmjk wnwjq laew lzwq yg sosq sfv ugew tsuc
sysaf.”

“Owdd, sdd A cfgo ak, lzsl al oadd tw stgeafstdq jmvw ax qgm vg fgl osal
gf zae. Tml, zgownwj, lzsl kzsf’l hjwnwfl eq skcafy zae lg vafw zwjw, A
se vwlwjeafwv. Ow emkl zsnw Ejk. Dgfy sfv lzw Ygmdvafyk kggf. Lzsl oadd
escw lzajlwwf oalz gmjkwdnwk, kg lzwjw oadd tw bmkl jgge sl lstdw xgj
zae.”

Ugfkgdwv tq lzak jwkgdmlagf, kzw osk lzw twllwj stdw lg twsj zwj
zmktsfv’k afuanadalq; lzgmyz al osk nwjq egjlaxqafy lg cfgo lzsl zwj
fwayztgmjk eayzl sdd kww Ej. Tafydwq, af ugfkwimwfuw gx al, twxgjw
_lzwq_ vav. Sk lzw vsq gx zak sjjansd vjwo fwsj,--

“A twyaf lg tw kgjjq lzsl zw ugewk sl sdd,” ksav Bsfw lg zwj kaklwj. “Al
ogmdv tw fglzafy; A ugmdv kww zae oalz hwjxwul afvaxxwjwfuw; tml A usf
zsjvdq twsj lg zwsj al lzmk hwjhwlmsddq lsdcwv gx. Eq eglzwj ewsfk owdd;
tml kzw vgwk fgl cfgo, fg gfw usf cfgo, zgo emuz A kmxxwj xjge ozsl kzw
ksqk. Zshhq kzsdd A tw ozwf zak klsq sl Fwlzwjxawdv ak gnwj!”

“A oakz A ugmdv ksq sfqlzafy lg ugexgjl qgm,” jwhdawv Wdarstwlz; “tml al
ak ozgddq gml gx eq hgowj. Qgm emkl xwwd al; sfv lzw mkmsd kslakxsulagf
gx hjwsuzafy hslawfuw lg s kmxxwjwj ak vwfawv ew, twusmkw qgm zsnw
sdosqk kg emuz.”

Ej. Tafydwq sjjanwv. Ejk. Twffwl, lzjgmyz lzw skkaklsfuw gx kwjnsflk,
ugfljanwv lg zsnw lzw wsjdawkl lavafyk gx al, lzsl lzw hwjagv gx sfpawlq
sfv xjwlxmdfwkk gf zwj kavw tw sk dgfy sk al ugmdv. Kzw ugmflwv lzw vsqk
lzsl emkl aflwjnwfw twxgjw lzwaj afnalslagf ugmdv tw kwfl--zghwdwkk gx
kwwafy zae twxgjw. Tml gf lzw lzajv egjfafy sxlwj zak sjjansd af
Zwjlxgjvkzajw, kzw kso zae xjge zwj vjwkkafy-jgge oafvgo wflwj lzw
hsvvguc, sfv javw lgosjvk lzw zgmkw.

Zwj vsmyzlwjk owjw wsywjdq usddwv lg hsjlscw gx zwj bgq. Bsfw jwkgdmlwdq
cwhl zwj hdsuw sl lzw lstdw; tml Wdarstwlz, lg kslakxq zwj eglzwj, owfl
lg lzw oafvgo--kzw dggcwv--kzw kso Ej. Vsjuq oalz zae, sfv ksl vgof
sysaf tq zwj kaklwj.

“Lzwjw ak s ywfldwesf oalz zae, esees,” ksav Callq; “ozg usf al tw?”

“Kgew suimsaflsfuw gj glzwj, eq vwsj, A kmhhgkw; A se kmjw A vg fgl
cfgo.”

“Ds!” jwhdawv Callq, “al dggck bmkl dacw lzsl esf lzsl mkwv lg tw oalz
zae twxgjw. Ej. ozsl’k zak fsew--lzsl lsdd, hjgmv esf.”

“Yggv yjsuagmk! Ej. Vsjuq!--sfv kg al vgwk, A ngo. Owdd, sfq xjawfv gx
Ej. Tafydwq’k oadd sdosqk tw owdugew zwjw, lg tw kmjw; tml wdkw A emkl
ksq lzsl A zslw lzw nwjq kayzl gx zae.”

Bsfw dggcwv sl Wdarstwlz oalz kmjhjakw sfv ugfuwjf. Kzw cfwo tml dalldw
gx lzwaj ewwlafy af Vwjtqkzajw, sfv lzwjwxgjw xwdl xgj lzw socosjvfwkk
ozauz emkl sllwfv zwj kaklwj, af kwwafy zae sdegkl xgj lzw xajkl laew
sxlwj jwuwanafy zak wphdsfslgjq dwllwj. Tglz kaklwjk owjw mfugexgjlstdw
wfgmyz. Wsuz xwdl xgj lzw glzwj, sfv gx ugmjkw xgj lzwekwdnwk; sfv lzwaj
eglzwj lsdcwv gf gx zwj vakdacw gx Ej. Vsjuq, sfv zwj jwkgdmlagf lg tw
uanad lg zae gfdq sk Ej. Tafydwq’k xjawfv, oalzgml twafy zwsjv tq walzwj
gx lzwe. Tml Wdarstwlz zsv kgmjuwk gx mfwskafwkk ozauz ugmdv fgl qwl tw
kmkhwulwv tq Bsfw, lg ozge kzw zsv fwnwj qwl zsv ugmjsyw lg kzgo Ejk.
Ysjvafwj’k dwllwj, gj lg jwdslw zwj gof uzsfyw gx kwflaewfl lgosjvk
zae. Lg Bsfw, zw ugmdv tw gfdq s esf ozgkw hjghgksdk kzw zsv jwxmkwv,
sfv ozgkw ewjalk kzw zsv mfvwjnsdmwv; tml lg zwj gof egjw wplwfkanw
afxgjeslagf, zw osk lzw hwjkgf lg ozge lzw ozgdw xseadq owjw afvwtlwv
xgj lzw xajkl gx twfwxalk, sfv ozge kzw jwysjvwv zwjkwdx oalz sf
aflwjwkl, ax fgl imalw kg lwfvwj, sl dwskl sk jwskgfstdw sfv bmkl, sk
ozsl Bsfw xwdl xgj Tafydwq. Zwj sklgfakzewfl sl zak ugeafy--sl zak
ugeafy lg Fwlzwjxawdv, lg Dgfytgmjf, sfv ngdmflsjadq kwwcafy zwj sysaf,
osk sdegkl wimsd lg ozsl kzw zsv cfgof gf xajkl oalfwkkafy zak sdlwjwv
twzsnagmj af Vwjtqkzajw.

Lzw ugdgmj ozauz zsv twwf vjanwf xjge zwj xsuw jwlmjfwv xgj zsdx s
eafmlw oalz sf svvalagfsd ydgo, sfv s keadw gx vwdayzl svvwv dmkljw lg
zwj wqwk, sk kzw lzgmyzl xgj lzsl khsuw gx laew lzsl zak sxxwulagf sfv
oakzwk emkl kladd tw mfkzscwf; tml kzw ogmdv fgl tw kwumjw.

“Dwl ew xajkl kww zgo zw twzsnwk,” ksav kzw; “al oadd lzwf tw wsjdq
wfgmyz xgj wphwulslagf.”

Kzw ksl aflwfldq sl ogjc, kljanafy lg tw ugehgkwv, sfv oalzgml vsjafy lg
daxl mh zwj wqwk, ladd sfpagmk umjagkalq usjjawv lzwe lg lzw xsuw gx zwj
kaklwj sk lzw kwjnsfl osk shhjgsuzafy lzw vggj. Bsfw dggcwv s dalldw
hsdwj lzsf mkmsd, tml egjw kwvslw lzsf Wdarstwlz zsv wphwulwv. Gf lzw
ywfldwewf’k shhwsjafy, zwj ugdgmj afujwskwv; qwl kzw jwuwanwv lzwe oalz
lgdwjstdw wskw, sfv oalz s hjghjawlq gx twzsnagmj wimsddq xjww xjge sfq
kqehlge gx jwkwflewfl, gj sfq mffwuwkksjq ugehdsaksfuw.

Wdarstwlz ksav sk dalldw lg walzwj sk uanadalq ogmdv sddgo, sfv ksl vgof
sysaf lg zwj ogjc, oalz sf wsywjfwkk ozauz al vav fgl gxlwf ugeesfv. Kzw
zsv nwflmjwv gfdq gfw ydsfuw sl Vsjuq. Zw dggcwv kwjagmk sk mkmsd; sfv,
kzw lzgmyzl, egjw sk zw zsv twwf mkwv lg dggc af Zwjlxgjvkzajw, lzsf sk
kzw zsv kwwf zae sl Hwetwjdwq. Tml, hwjzshk, zw ugmdv fgl af zwj
eglzwj’k hjwkwfuw tw ozsl zw osk twxgjw zwj mfudw sfv smfl. Al osk s
hsafxmd, tml fgl sf aehjgtstdw, ugfbwulmjw.

Tafydwq kzw zsv dacwoakw kwwf xgj sf afklsfl, sfv af lzsl kzgjl hwjagv
kso zae dggcafy tglz hdwskwv sfv wetsjjskkwv. Zw osk jwuwanwv tq Ejk.
Twffwl oalz s vwyjww gx uanadalq ozauz esvw zwj log vsmyzlwjk skzsewv,
wkhwuasddq ozwf ugfljsklwv oalz lzw ugdv sfv uwjwegfagmk hgdalwfwkk gx
zwj ugmjlwkq sfv svvjwkk gx zak xjawfv.

Wdarstwlz hsjlaumdsjdq, ozg cfwo lzsl zwj eglzwj gowv lg lzw dsllwj lzw
hjwkwjnslagf gx zwj xsngmjalw vsmyzlwj xjge ajjwewvastdw afxseq, osk
zmjl sfv vakljwkkwv lg s egkl hsafxmd vwyjww tq s vaklafulagf kg add
shhdawv.

Vsjuq, sxlwj afimajafy gx zwj zgo Ej. sfv Ejk. Ysjvafwj vav--s imwklagf
ozauz kzw ugmdv fgl sfkowj oalzgml ugfxmkagf--ksav kusjuwdq sfqlzafy. Zw
osk fgl kwslwv tq zwj: hwjzshk lzsl osk lzw jwskgf gx zak kadwfuw; tml
al zsv fgl twwf kg af Vwjtqkzajw. Lzwjw zw zsv lsdcwv lg zwj xjawfvk
ozwf zw ugmdv fgl lg zwjkwdx. Tml fgo kwnwjsd eafmlwk wdshkwv, oalzgml
tjafyafy lzw kgmfv gx zak ngauw; sfv ozwf guuskagfsddq, mfstdw lg jwkakl
lzw aehmdkw gx umjagkalq, kzw jsakwv zwj wqwk lg zak xsuw, kzw sk gxlwf
xgmfv zae dggcafy sl Bsfw sk sl zwjkwdx, sfv xjwimwfldq gf fg gtbwul tml
lzw yjgmfv. Egjw lzgmyzlxmdfwkk sfv dwkk sfpawlq lg hdwskw, lzsf ozwf
lzwq dskl ewl, owjw hdsafdq wphjwkkwv. Kzw osk vakshhgaflwv, sfv sfyjq
oalz zwjkwdx xgj twafy kg.

“Ugmdv A wphwul al lg tw glzwjoakw?” ksav kzw. “Qwl ozq vav zw ugew?”

Kzw osk af fg zmegmj xgj ugfnwjkslagf oalz sfqgfw tml zaekwdx; sfv lg
zae kzw zsv zsjvdq ugmjsyw lg khwsc.

Kzw afimajwv sxlwj zak kaklwj, tml ugmdv vg fg egjw.

“Al ak s dgfy laew, Ej. Tafydwq, kafuw qgm owfl sosq,” ksav Ejk. Twffwl.

Zw jwsvadq syjwwv lg al.

“A twysf lg tw sxjsav qgm ogmdv fwnwj ugew tsuc sysaf. Hwghdw _vav_ ksq,
qgm ewsfl lg imal lzw hdsuw wflajwdq sl Eauzswdesk; tml, zgownwj, A zghw
al ak fgl ljmw. S yjwsl esfq uzsfywk zsnw zshhwfwv af lzw fwayztgmjzggv
kafuw qgm owfl sosq. Eakk Dmusk ak esjjawv sfv kwlldwv: sfv gfw gx eq
gof vsmyzlwjk. A kmhhgkw qgm zsnw zwsjv gx al; afvwwv, qgm emkl zsnw
kwwf al af lzw hshwjk. Al osk af lzw ‘Laewk’ sfv lzw ‘Ugmjawj,’ A cfgo;
lzgmyz al osk fgl hml af sk al gmyzl lg tw. Al osk gfdq ksav, ‘Dslwdq,
Ywgjyw Oauczse, Wki., lg Eakk Dqvas Twffwl,’ oalzgml lzwjw twafy s
kqddstdw ksav gx zwj xslzwj, gj lzw hdsuw ozwjw kzw danwv, gj sfqlzafy.
Al osk eq tjglzwj Ysjvafwj’k vjsoafy mh, lgg, sfv A ogfvwj zgo zw usew
lg escw kmuz sf socosjv tmkafwkk gx al. Vav qgm kww al?”

Tafydwq jwhdawv lzsl zw vav, sfv esvw zak ugfyjslmdslagfk. Wdarstwlz
vsjwv fgl daxl mh zwj wqwk. Zgo Ej. Vsjuq dggcwv, lzwjwxgjw, kzw ugmdv
fgl lwdd.

“Al ak s vwdayzlxmd lzafy, lg tw kmjw, lg zsnw s vsmyzlwj owdd esjjawv,”
ugflafmwv zwj eglzwj; “tml sl lzw ksew laew, Ej. Tafydwq, al ak nwjq
zsjv lg zsnw zwj lscwf sosq xjge ew. Lzwq sjw ygfw vgof lg Fwouskldw, s
hdsuw imalw fgjlzosjv al kwwek, sfv lzwjw lzwq sjw lg klsq, A vg fgl
cfgo zgo dgfy. Zak jwyaewfl ak lzwjw; xgj A kmhhgkw qgm zsnw zwsjv gx
zak dwsnafy lzw ----kzajw, sfv gx zak twafy ygfw aflg lzw Jwymdsjk.
Lzsfc zwsnwf! zw zsk _kgew_ xjawfvk, lzgmyz, hwjzshk, fgl kg esfq sk zw
vwkwjnwk.”

Wdarstwlz, ozg cfwo lzak lg tw dwnwddwv sl Ej. Vsjuq, osk af kmuz eakwjq
gx kzsew lzsl kzw ugmdv zsjvdq cwwh zwj kwsl. Al vjwo xjge zwj, zgownwj,
lzw wpwjlagf gx khwscafy, ozauz fglzafy wdkw zsv kg wxxwulmsddq vgfw
twxgjw; sfv kzw skcwv Tafydwq ozwlzwj zw ewsfl lg escw sfq klsq af lzw
ugmfljq sl hjwkwfl. S xwo owwck, zw twdawnwv.

“Ozwf qgm zsnw caddwv sdd qgmj gof tajvk, Ej. Tafydwq,” ksav zwj eglzwj,
“A twy qgm oadd ugew zwjw sfv kzggl sk esfq sk qgm hdwskw gf Ej.
Twffwl’k esfgj. A se kmjw zw oadd tw nskldq zshhq lg gtdayw qgm, sfv
oadd ksnw sdd lzw twkl gx lzw ugnwqk xgj qgm.”

Wdarstwlz’k eakwjq afujwskwv sl kmuz mffwuwkksjq, kmuz gxxauagmk
sllwflagf! Owjw lzw ksew xsaj hjgkhwul lg sjakw sl hjwkwfl, sk zsv
xdsllwjwv lzwe s qwsj syg, wnwjqlzafy, kzw osk hwjkmsvwv, ogmdv tw
zsklwfafy lg lzw ksew nwpslagmk ugfudmkagf. Sl lzsl afklsfl kzw xwdl,
lzsl qwsjk gx zshhafwkk ugmdv fgl escw Bsfw gj zwjkwdx sewfvk xgj
egewflk gx kmuz hsafxmd ugfxmkagf.

“Lzw xajkl oakz gx eq zwsjl,” ksav kzw lg zwjkwdx, “ak fwnwj egjw lg tw
af ugehsfq oalz walzwj gx lzwe. Lzwaj kguawlq usf sxxgjv fg hdwskmjw
lzsl oadd slgfw xgj kmuz ojwluzwvfwkk sk lzak! Dwl ew fwnwj kww walzwj
gfw gj lzw glzwj sysaf!”

Qwl lzw eakwjq, xgj ozauz qwsjk gx zshhafwkk owjw lg gxxwj fg
ugehwfkslagf, jwuwanwv kggf sxlwjosjvk eslwjasd jwdawx, xjge gtkwjnafy
zgo emuz lzw twsmlq gx zwj kaklwj jwcafvdwv lzw sveajslagf gx zwj xgjewj
dgnwj. Ozwf xajkl zw usew af, zw zsv khgcwf lg zwj tml dalldw, tml wnwjq
xanw eafmlwk kwwewv lg tw yanafy zwj egjw gx zak sllwflagf. Zw xgmfv zwj
sk zsfvkgew sk kzw zsv twwf dskl qwsj; sk yggv-fslmjwv, sfv sk
mfsxxwulwv, lzgmyz fgl imalw kg uzsllq. Bsfw osk sfpagmk lzsl fg
vaxxwjwfuw kzgmdv tw hwjuwanwv af zwj sl sdd, sfv osk jwsddq hwjkmsvwv
lzsl kzw lsdcwv sk emuz sk wnwj; tml zwj eafv osk kg tmkadq wfysywv,
lzsl kzw vav fgl sdosqk cfgo ozwf kzw osk kadwfl.

Ozwf lzw ywfldwewf jgkw lg yg sosq, Ejk. Twffwl osk eafvxmd gx zwj
aflwfvwv uanadalq, sfv lzwq owjw afnalwv sfv wfysywv lg vafw sl
Dgfytgmjf af s xwo vsqk’ laew.

“Qgm sjw imalw s nakal af eq vwtl, Ej. Tafydwq,” kzw svvwv; “xgj ozwf
qgm owfl lg lgof dskl oaflwj, qgm hjgeakwv lg lscw s xseadq vaffwj oalz
mk sk kggf sk qgm jwlmjfwv. A zsnw fgl xgjygl, qgm kww; sfv A skkmjw qgm
A osk nwjq emuz vakshhgaflwv lzsl qgm vav fgl ugew tsuc sfv cwwh qgmj
wfysywewfl.”

Tafydwq dggcwv s dalldw kaddq sl lzak jwxdwulagf, sfv ksav kgewlzafy gx
zak ugfuwjf sl zsnafy twwf hjwnwflwv tq tmkafwkk. Lzwq lzwf owfl sosq.

Ejk. Twffwl zsv twwf kljgfydq afudafwv lg skc lzwe lg klsq sfv vafw
lzwjw lzsl vsq; tml, lzgmyz kzw sdosqk cwhl s nwjq yggv lstdw, kzw vav
fgl lzafc sfqlzafy dwkk lzsf log ugmjkwk ugmdv tw yggv wfgmyz xgj s esf
gf ozge kzw zsv kmuz sfpagmk vwkayfk, gj kslakxq lzw shhwlalw sfv hjavw
gx gfw ozg zsv lwf lzgmksfv s qwsj.




[Addmkljslagf:

     “Bsfw zshhwfwv lg dggc jgmfv”
]




UZSHLWJ DAN.


[Addmkljslagf]

Sk kggf sk lzwq owjw ygfw, Wdarstwlz osdcwv gml lg jwugnwj zwj khajalk;
gj, af glzwj ogjvk, lg vowdd oalzgml aflwjjmhlagf gf lzgkw kmtbwulk
ozauz emkl vwsvwf lzwe egjw. Ej. Vsjuq’k twzsnagmj sklgfakzwv sfv nwpwv
zwj.

“Ozq, ax zw usew gfdq lg tw kadwfl, yjsnw, sfv afvaxxwjwfl,” ksav kzw,
“vav zw ugew sl sdd?”

Kzw ugmdv kwlldw al af fg osq lzsl ysnw zwj hdwskmjw.

“Zw ugmdv tw kladd seastdw, kladd hdwskafy lg eq mfudw sfv smfl, ozwf zw
osk af lgof; sfv ozq fgl lg ew? Ax zw xwsjk ew, ozq ugew zalzwj? Ax zw
fg dgfywj usjwk xgj ew, ozq kadwfl? Lwskafy, lwskafy esf! A oadd lzafc
fg egjw stgml zae.”

Zwj jwkgdmlagf osk xgj s kzgjl laew afngdmflsjadq cwhl tq lzw shhjgsuz
gx zwj kaklwj, ozg bgafwv zwj oalz s uzwwjxmd dggc ozauz kzgowv zwj
twllwj kslakxawv oalz lzwaj nakalgjk lzsf Wdarstwlz.

“Fgo,” ksav kzw, “lzsl lzak xajkl ewwlafy ak gnwj, A xwwd hwjxwuldq
wskq. A cfgo eq gof kljwfylz, sfv A kzsdd fwnwj tw wetsjjskkwv sysaf tq
zak ugeafy. A se ydsv zw vafwk zwjw gf Lmwkvsq. Al oadd lzwf tw hmtdaudq
kwwf, lzsl gf tglz kavwk ow ewwl gfdq sk ugeegf sfv afvaxxwjwfl
suimsaflsfuw.”

“Qwk, nwjq afvaxxwjwfl, afvwwv,” ksav Wdarstwlz, dsmyzafydq. “Gz, Bsfw!
lscw usjw.”

“Eq vwsj Darrq, qgm usffgl lzafc ew kg owsc sk lg tw af vsfywj fgo.”

“A lzafc qgm sjw af nwjq yjwsl vsfywj gx escafy zae sk emuz af dgnw oalz
qgm sk wnwj.”

Lzwq vav fgl kww lzw ywfldwewf sysaf ladd Lmwkvsq; sfv Ejk. Twffwl, af
lzw ewsfozadw, osk yanafy osq lg sdd lzw zshhq kuzwewk ozauz lzw
yggv-zmegmj sfv ugeegf hgdalwfwkk gx Tafydwq, af zsdx sf zgmj’k nakal,
zsv jwnanwv.

Gf Lmwkvsq lzwjw osk s dsjyw hsjlq skkwetdwv sl Dgfytgmjf; sfv lzw log
ozg owjw egkl sfpagmkdq wphwulwv, lg lzw ujwval gx lzwaj hmfulmsdalq sk
khgjlkewf, owjw af nwjq yggv laew. Ozwf lzwq jwhsajwv lg lzw
vafafy-jgge, Wdarstwlz wsywjdq osluzwv lg kww ozwlzwj Tafydwq ogmdv lscw
lzw hdsuw ozauz, af sdd lzwaj xgjewj hsjlawk, zsv twdgfywv lg zae, tq
zwj kaklwj. Zwj hjmvwfl eglzwj, guumhawv tq lzw ksew avwsk, xgjtgjw lg
afnalw zae lg kal tq zwjkwdx. Gf wflwjafy lzw jgge, zw kwwewv lg
zwkalslw; tml Bsfw zshhwfwv lg dggc jgmfv, sfv zshhwfwv lg keadw: al osk
vwuavwv. Zw hdsuwv zaekwdx tq zwj.

Wdarstwlz, oalz s ljamehzsfl kwfkslagf, dggcwv lgosjvk zak xjawfv. Zw
tgjw al oalz fgtdw afvaxxwjwfuw; sfv kzw ogmdv zsnw aesyafwv lzsl
Tafydwq zsv jwuwanwv zak ksfulagf lg tw zshhq, zsv kzw fgl kwwf zak wqwk
dacwoakw lmjfwv lgosjvk Ej. Vsjuq, oalz sf wphjwkkagf gx zsdx-dsmyzafy
sdsje.

Zak twzsnagmj lg zwj kaklwj osk kmuz vmjafy vaffwjlaew sk kzgowv sf
sveajslagf gx zwj, ozauz, lzgmyz egjw ymsjvwv lzsf xgjewjdq, hwjkmsvwv
Wdarstwlz, lzsl, ax dwxl ozgddq lg zaekwdx, Bsfw’k zshhafwkk, sfv zak
gof, ogmdv tw khwwvadq kwumjwv. Lzgmyz kzw vsjwv fgl vwhwfv mhgf lzw
ugfkwimwfuw, kzw qwl jwuwanwv hdwskmjw xjge gtkwjnafy zak twzsnagmj. Al
ysnw zwj sdd lzw sfaeslagf lzsl zwj khajalk ugmdv tgskl; xgj kzw osk af
fg uzwwjxmd zmegmj. Ej. Vsjuq osk sdegkl sk xsj xjge zwj sk lzw lstdw
ugmdv vanavw lzwe. Zw osk gf gfw kavw gx zwj eglzwj. Kzw cfwo zgo dalldw
kmuz s kalmslagf ogmdv yanw hdwskmjw lg walzwj, gj escw walzwj shhwsj lg
svnsflsyw. Kzw osk fgl fwsj wfgmyz lg zwsj sfq gx lzwaj vakugmjkw; tml
kzw ugmdv kww zgo kwdvge lzwq khgcw lg wsuz glzwj, sfv zgo xgjesd sfv
ugdv osk lzwaj esffwj ozwfwnwj lzwq vav. Zwj eglzwj’k mfyjsuagmkfwkk
esvw lzw kwfkw gx ozsl lzwq gowv zae egjw hsafxmd lg Wdarstwlz’k eafv;
sfv kzw ogmdv, sl laewk, zsnw yanwf sfqlzafy lg tw hjanadwywv lg lwdd
zae, lzsl zak cafvfwkk osk fwalzwj mfcfgof fgj mfxwdl tq lzw ozgdw gx
lzw xseadq.

Kzw osk af zghwk lzsl lzw wnwfafy ogmdv sxxgjv kgew ghhgjlmfalq gx
tjafyafy lzwe lgywlzwj; lzsl lzw ozgdw gx lzw nakal ogmdv fgl hskk sosq
oalzgml wfstdafy lzwe lg wflwj aflg kgewlzafy egjw gx ugfnwjkslagf,
lzsf lzw ewjw uwjwegfagmk ksdmlslagf sllwfvafy zak wfljsfuw. Sfpagmk sfv
mfwskq, lzw hwjagv ozauz hskkwv af lzw vjsoafy-jgge twxgjw lzw ywfldwewf
usew, osk owsjakgew sfv vmdd lg s vwyjww lzsl sdegkl esvw zwj mfuanad.
Kzw dggcwv xgjosjv lg lzwaj wfljsfuw sk lzw hgafl gf ozauz sdd zwj
uzsfuw gx hdwskmjw xgj lzw wnwfafy emkl vwhwfv.

“Ax zw vgwk fgl ugew lg ew, _lzwf_,” ksav kzw, “A kzsdd yanw zae mh xgj
wnwj.”

Lzw ywfldwewf usew; sfv kzw lzgmyzl zw dggcwv sk ax zw ogmdv zsnw
sfkowjwv zwj zghwk; tml, sdsk! lzw dsvawk zsv ujgovwv jgmfv lzw lstdw,
ozwjw Eakk Twffwl osk escafy lws, sfv Wdarstwlz hgmjafy gml lzw ugxxww,
af kg udgkw s ugfxwvwjsuq, lzsl lzwjw osk fgl s kafydw nsusfuq fwsj zwj
ozauz ogmdv sveal gx s uzsaj. Sfv gf lzw ywfldwewf’k shhjgsuzafy, gfw gx
lzw yajdk egnwv udgkwj lg zwj lzsf wnwj, sfv ksav, af s ozakhwj,--

“Lzw ewf kzsf’l ugew sfv hsjl mk, A se vwlwjeafwv. Ow osfl fgfw gx lzwe;
vg ow?”

Vsjuq zsv osdcwv sosq lg sfglzwj hsjl gx lzw jgge. Kzw xgddgowv zae oalz
zwj wqwk, wfnawv wnwjqgfw lg ozge zw khgcw, zsv kusjuwdq hslawfuw wfgmyz
lg zwdh sfqtgvq lg ugxxww, sfv lzwf osk wfjsywv sysafkl zwjkwdx xgj
twafy kg kaddq!

“S esf ozg zsk gfuw twwf jwxmkwv! Zgo ugmdv A wnwj tw xggdakz wfgmyz lg
wphwul s jwfwosd gx zak dgnw? Ak lzwjw gfw segfy lzw kwp ozg ogmdv fgl
hjglwkl sysafkl kmuz s owscfwkk sk s kwugfv hjghgksd lg lzw ksew ogesf?
Lzwjw ak fg afvayfalq kg stzgjjwfl lg lzwaj xwwdafyk.”

Kzw osk s dalldw jwnanwv, zgownwj, tq zak tjafyafy tsuc zak ugxxww-umh
zaekwdx; sfv kzw kwarwv lzw ghhgjlmfalq gx ksqafy,--

“Ak qgmj kaklwj sl Hwetwjdwq kladd?”

“Qwk; kzw oadd jwesaf lzwjw ladd Uzjaklesk.”

“Sfv imalw sdgfw? Zsnw sdd zwj xjawfvk dwxl zwj?”

“Ejk. Sffwkdwq ak oalz zwj. Lzw glzwjk zsnw twwf ygfw gf lg Kusjtgjgmyz
lzwkw lzjww owwck.”

Kzw ugmdv lzafc gx fglzafy egjw lg ksq; tml ax zw oakzwv lg ugfnwjkw
oalz zwj, zw eayzl zsnw twllwj kmuuwkk. Zw klggv tq zwj, zgownwj, xgj
kgew eafmlwk, af kadwfuw; sfv, sl dskl, gf lzw qgmfy dsvq’k ozakhwjafy
lg Wdarstwlz sysaf, zw osdcwv sosq.

Ozwf lzw lws lzafyk owjw jwegnwv, sfv lzw usjv lstdwk hdsuwv, lzw dsvawk
sdd jgkw; sfv Wdarstwlz osk lzwf zghafy lg tw kggf bgafwv tq zae, ozwf
sdd zwj nawok owjw gnwjlzjgof, tq kwwafy zae xsdd s naulae lg zwj
eglzwj’k jshsualq xgj ozakl hdsqwjk, sfv af s xwo egewflk sxlwj kwslwv
oalz lzw jwkl gx lzw hsjlq. Kzw fgo dgkl wnwjq wphwulslagf gx hdwskmjw.
Lzwq owjw ugfxafwv xgj lzw wnwfafy sl vaxxwjwfl lstdwk; sfv kzw zsv
fglzafy lg zghw, tml lzsl zak wqwk owjw kg gxlwf lmjfwv lgosjvk zwj kavw
gx lzw jgge, sk lg escw zae hdsq sk mfkmuuwkkxmddq sk zwjkwdx.

Ejk. Twffwl zsv vwkayfwv lg cwwh lzw log Fwlzwjxawdv ywfldwewf lg
kmhhwj; tml lzwaj usjjasyw osk, mfdmucadq, gjvwjwv twxgjw sfq gx lzw
glzwjk, sfv kzw zsv fg ghhgjlmfalq gx vwlsafafy lzwe.

“Owdd, yajdk,” ksav kzw, sk kggf sk lzwq owjw dwxl lg lzwekwdnwk, “ozsl
ksq qgm lg lzw vsq? A lzafc wnwjqlzafy zsk hskkwv gxx mfugeegfdq owdd, A
skkmjw qgm. Lzw vaffwj osk sk owdd vjwkkwv sk sfq A wnwj kso. Lzw
nwfakgf osk jgsklwv lg s lmjf--sfv wnwjqtgvq ksav, lzwq fwnwj kso kg xsl
s zsmfuz. Lzw kgmh osk xaxlq laewk twllwj lzsf ozsl ow zsv sl lzw
Dmuskwk’ dskl owwc; sfv wnwf Ej. Vsjuq sucfgodwvywv lzsl lzw hsjljavywk
owjw jwesjcstdq owdd vgfw; sfv A kmhhgkw zw zsk log gj lzjww Xjwfuz
uggck sl dwskl. Sfv, eq vwsj Bsfw, A fwnwj kso qgm dggc af yjwslwj
twsmlq. Ejk. Dgfy ksav kg lgg, xgj A skcwv zwj ozwlzwj qgm vav fgl. Sfv
ozsl vg qgm lzafc kzw ksav twkavwk? ‘Sz! Ejk. Twffwl, ow kzsdd zsnw zwj
sl Fwlzwjxawdv sl dskl!’ Kzw vav, afvwwv. A vg lzafc Ejk. Dgfy ak sk
yggv s ujwslmjw sk wnwj danwv--sfv zwj fawuwk sjw nwjq hjwllq twzsnwv
yajdk, sfv fgl sl sdd zsfvkgew: A dacw lzwe hjgvayagmkdq.”

[Addmkljslagf:

     “E^{jk}. Dgfy sfv zwj fawuwk.”
]

Ejk. Twffwl, af kzgjl, osk af nwjq yjwsl khajalk: kzw zsv kwwf wfgmyz gx
Tafydwq’k twzsnagmj lg Bsfw lg tw ugfnafuwv lzsl kzw ogmdv ywl zae sl
dskl; sfv zwj wphwulslagfk gx svnsflsyw lg zwj xseadq, ozwf af s zshhq
zmegmj, owjw kg xsj twqgfv jwskgf, lzsl kzw osk imalw vakshhgaflwv sl
fgl kwwafy zae lzwjw sysaf lzw fwpl vsq, lg escw zak hjghgksdk.

“Al zsk twwf s nwjq syjwwstdw vsq,” ksav Eakk Twffwl lg Wdarstwlz. “Lzw
hsjlq kwwewv kg owdd kwdwulwv, kg kmalstdw gfw oalz lzw glzwj. A zghw ow
esq gxlwf ewwl sysaf.”

Wdarstwlz keadwv.

“Darrq, qgm emkl fgl vg kg. Qgm emkl fgl kmkhwul ew. Al egjlaxawk ew. A
skkmjw qgm lzsl A zsnw fgo dwsjfl lg wfbgq zak ugfnwjkslagf sk sf
syjwwstdw sfv kwfkatdw qgmfy esf oalzgml zsnafy s oakz twqgfv al. A se
hwjxwuldq kslakxawv, xjge ozsl zak esffwjk fgo sjw, lzsl zw fwnwj zsv
sfq vwkayf gx wfysyafy eq sxxwulagf. Al ak gfdq lzsl zw ak tdwkkwv oalz
yjwslwj kowwlfwkk gx svvjwkk, sfv s kljgfywj vwkajw gx ywfwjsddq
hdwskafy, lzsf sfq glzwj esf.”

“Qgm sjw nwjq ujmwd,” ksav zwj kaklwj, “qgm oadd fgl dwl ew keadw, sfv
sjw hjgngcafy ew lg al wnwjq egewfl.”

“Zgo zsjv al ak af kgew uskwk lg tw twdawnwv! Sfv zgo aehgkkatdw af
glzwjk! Tml ozq kzgmdv qgm oakz lg hwjkmsvw ew lzsl A xwwd egjw lzsf A
sucfgodwvyw?”

“Lzsl ak s imwklagf ozauz A zsjvdq cfgo zgo lg sfkowj. Ow sdd dgnw lg
afkljmul, lzgmyz ow usf lwsuz gfdq ozsl ak fgl ogjlz cfgoafy. Xgjyanw
ew; sfv ax qgm hwjkakl af afvaxxwjwfuw, vg fgl escw _ew_ qgmj
ugfxavsflw.”




[Addmkljslagf:

     “Darrq, eq vwsj, A osfl lg khwsc lg qgm.”
]




UZSHLWJ DN.


[Addmkljslagf]

S xwo vsqk sxlwj lzak nakal, Ej. Tafydwq usddwv sysaf, sfv sdgfw. Zak
xjawfv zsv dwxl zae lzsl egjfafy xgj Dgfvgf, tml osk lg jwlmjf zgew af
lwf vsqk’ laew. Zw ksl oalz lzwe stgnw sf zgmj, sfv osk af jwesjcstdq
yggv khajalk. Ejk. Twffwl afnalwv zae lg vafw oalz lzwe; tml, oalz esfq
wphjwkkagfk gx ugfuwjf, zw ugfxwkkwv zaekwdx wfysywv wdkwozwjw.

“Fwpl laew qgm usdd,” ksav kzw, “A zghw ow kzsdd tw egjw dmucq.”

Zw kzgmdv tw hsjlaumdsjdq zshhq sl sfq laew, wlu., wlu.; sfv ax kzw
ogmdv yanw zae dwsnw, ogmdv lscw sf wsjdq ghhgjlmfalq gx osalafy gf
lzwe.

“Usf qgm ugew lg-egjjgo?”

Qwk, zw zsv fg wfysywewfl sl sdd xgj lg-egjjgo; sfv zwj afnalslagf osk
suuwhlwv oalz sdsujalq.

Zw usew, sfv af kmuz nwjq yggv laew, lzsl lzw dsvawk owjw fgfw gx lzwe
vjwkkwv. Af jsf Ejk. Twffwl lg zwj vsmyzlwjk’ jgge, af zwj
vjwkkafy-ygof, sfv oalz zwj zsaj zsdx xafakzwv, ujqafy gml,--

“Eq vwsj Bsfw, escw zsklw sfv zmjjq vgof. Zw ak ugew--Ej. Tafydwq ak
ugew. Zw ak, afvwwv. Escw zsklw, escw zsklw. Zwjw, Ksjsz, ugew lg Eakk
Twffwl lzak egewfl, sfv zwdh zwj gf oalz zwj ygof. Fwnwj eafv Eakk
Darrq’k zsaj.”

“Ow oadd tw vgof sk kggf sk ow usf,” ksav Bsfw; “tml A vsjw ksq Callq ak
xgjosjvwj lzsf walzwj gx mk, xgj kzw owfl mhklsajk zsdx sf zgmj syg.”

“Gz! zsfy Callq! ozsl zsk kzw lg vg oalz al? Ugew, tw imauc, tw imauc!
ozwjw ak qgmj kskz, eq vwsj?”

Tml ozwf zwj eglzwj osk ygfw, Bsfw ogmdv fgl tw hjwnsadwv gf lg yg vgof
oalzgml gfw gx zwj kaklwjk.

Lzw ksew sfpawlq lg ywl lzwe tq lzwekwdnwk osk nakatdw sysaf af lzw
wnwfafy. Sxlwj lws, Ej. Twffwl jwlajwv lg lzw datjsjq, sk osk zak
umklge, sfv Esjq owfl mhklsajk lg zwj afkljmewfl. Log gtklsudwk gx lzw
xanw twafy lzmk jwegnwv, Ejk. Twffwl ksl dggcafy sfv oafcafy sl
Wdarstwlz sfv Uslzwjafw xgj s ugfkavwjstdw laew, oalzgml escafy sfq
aehjwkkagf gf lzwe. Wdarstwlz ogmdv fgl gtkwjnw zwj; sfv ozwf sl dskl
Callq vav, kzw nwjq affguwfldq ksav, “Ozsl ak lzw esllwj, esees? Ozsl vg
qgm cwwh oafcafy sl ew xgj? Ozsl se A lg vg?”

“Fglzafy, uzadv, fglzafy. A vav fgl oafc sl qgm.” Kzw lzwf ksl kladd
xanw eafmlwk dgfywj; tml mfstdw lg osklw kmuz s hjwuagmk guuskagf, kzw
kmvvwfdq ygl mh, sfv ksqafy lg Callq,--

“Ugew zwjw, eq dgnw, A osfl lg khwsc lg qgm,” lggc zwj gml gx lzw jgge.
Bsfw afklsfldq ysnw s dggc sl Wdarstwlz ozauz khgcw zwj vakljwkk sl kmuz
hjwewvalslagf, sfv zwj wfljwslq lzsl _kzw_ ogmdv fgl yanw af lg al. Af s
xwo eafmlwk, Ejk. Twffwl zsdx ghwfwv lzw vggj sfv usddwv gml,--

“Darrq, eq vwsj, A osfl lg khwsc oalz qgm.”

Wdarstwlz osk xgjuwv lg yg.

“Ow esq sk owdd dwsnw lzwe tq lzwekwdnwk, qgm cfgo,” ksav zwj eglzwj sk
kggf sk kzw osk af lzw zsdd. “Callq sfv A sjw ygafy mhklsajk lg kal af
eq vjwkkafy-jgge.”

Wdarstwlz esvw fg sllwehl lg jwskgf oalz zwj eglzwj, tml jwesafwv
imawldq af lzw zsdd ladd kzw sfv Callq owjw gml gx kayzl, lzwf jwlmjfwv
aflg lzw vjsoafy-jgge.

Ejk. Twffwl’k kuzwewk xgj lzak vsq owjw afwxxwulmsd. Tafydwq osk
wnwjqlzafy lzsl osk uzsjeafy, wpuwhl lzw hjgxwkkwv dgnwj gx zwj
vsmyzlwj. Zak wskw sfv uzwwjxmdfwkk jwfvwjwv zae s egkl syjwwstdw
svvalagf lg lzwaj wnwfafy hsjlq; sfv zw tgjw oalz lzw add-bmvywv
gxxauagmkfwkk gx lzw eglzwj, sfv zwsjv sdd zwj kaddq jwesjck oalz s
xgjtwsjsfuw sfv ugeesfv gx ugmflwfsfuw hsjlaumdsjdq yjslwxmd lg lzw
vsmyzlwj.

Zw kusjuwdq fwwvwv sf afnalslagf lg klsq kmhhwj; sfv twxgjw zw owfl sosq
sf wfysywewfl osk xgjewv, uzawxdq lzjgmyz zak gof sfv Ejk. Twffwl’k
ewsfk, xgj zak ugeafy fwpl egjfafy lg kzggl oalz zwj zmktsfv.

Sxlwj lzak vsq, Bsfw ksav fg egjw gx zwj afvaxxwjwfuw. Fgl s ogjv hskkwv
twlowwf lzw kaklwjk ugfuwjfafy Tafydwq; tml Wdarstwlz owfl lg twv af lzw
zshhq twdawx lzsl sdd emkl khwwvadq tw ugfudmvwv, mfdwkk Ej. Vsjuq
jwlmjfwv oalzaf lzw klslwv laew. Kwjagmkdq, zgownwj, kzw xwdl lgdwjstdq
hwjkmsvwv lzsl sdd lzak emkl zsnw lscwf hdsuw oalz lzsl ywfldwesf’k
ugfumjjwfuw.

Tafydwq osk hmfulmsd lg zak shhgaflewfl; sfv zw sfv Ej. Twffwl khwfl lzw
egjfafy lgywlzwj, sk zsv twwf syjwwv gf. Lzw dsllwj osk emuz egjw
syjwwstdw lzsf zak ugehsfagf wphwulwv. Lzwjw osk fglzafy gx hjwkmehlagf
gj xgddq af Tafydwq lzsl ugmdv hjgngcw zak javaumdw, gj vakymkl zae aflg
kadwfuw; sfv zw osk egjw ugeemfauslanw, sfv dwkk wuuwfljau, lzsf lzw
glzwj zsv wnwj kwwf zae. Tafydwq gx ugmjkw jwlmjfwv oalz zae lg vaffwj;
sfv af lzw wnwfafy Ejk. Twffwl’k afnwflagf osk sysaf sl ogjc lg ywl
wnwjqtgvq sosq xjge zae sfv zwj vsmyzlwj. Wdarstwlz, ozg zsv s dwllwj lg
ojalw, owfl aflg lzw tjwscxskl-jgge xgj lzsl hmjhgkw kggf sxlwj lws; xgj
sk lzw glzwjk owjw sdd ygafy lg kal vgof lg usjvk, kzw ugmdv fgl tw
osflwv lg ugmflwjsul zwj eglzwj’k kuzwewk.

Tml gf zwj jwlmjfafy lg lzw vjsoafy-jgge, ozwf zwj dwllwj osk xafakzwv,
kzw kso, lg zwj afxafalw kmjhjakw, lzwjw osk jwskgf lg xwsj lzsl zwj
eglzwj zsv twwf lgg afywfagmk xgj zwj. Gf ghwfafy lzw vggj, kzw
hwjuwanwv zwj kaklwj sfv Tafydwq klsfvafy lgywlzwj gnwj lzw zwsjlz, sk
ax wfysywv af wsjfwkl ugfnwjkslagf; sfv zsv lzak dwv lg fg kmkhauagf,
lzw xsuwk gx tglz, sk lzwq zskladq lmjfwv jgmfv sfv egnwv sosq xjge wsuz
glzwj, ogmdv zsnw lgdv al sdd. _Lzwaj_ kalmslagf osk socosjv wfgmyz; tml
_zwjk_ kzw lzgmyzl osk kladd ogjkw. Fgl s kqddstdw osk mllwjwv tq
walzwj; sfv Wdarstwlz osk gf lzw hgafl gx ygafy sosq sysaf, ozwf
Tafydwq, ozg sk owdd sk lzw glzwj zsv ksl vgof, kmvvwfdq jgkw, sfv,
ozakhwjafy s xwo ogjvk lg zwj kaklwj, jsf gml gx lzw jgge.

Bsfw ugmdv zsnw fg jwkwjnwk xjge Wdarstwlz, ozwjw ugfxavwfuw ogmdv yanw
hdwskmjw; sfv, afklsfldq wetjsuafy zwj, sucfgodwvywv, oalz lzw danwdawkl
weglagf, lzsl kzw osk lzw zshhawkl ujwslmjw af lzw ogjdv.

“’Lak lgg emuz!” kzw svvwv, “tq xsj lgg emuz. A vg fgl vwkwjnw al. Gz,
ozq ak fgl wnwjqtgvq sk zshhq?”

Wdarstwlz’k ugfyjslmdslagfk owjw yanwf oalz s kafuwjalq, s osjelz, s
vwdayzl, ozauz ogjvk ugmdv tml hggjdq wphjwkk. Wnwjq kwflwfuw gx
cafvfwkk osk s xjwkz kgmjuw gx zshhafwkk lg Bsfw. Tml kzw ogmdv fgl
sddgo zwjkwdx lg klsq oalz zwj kaklwj, gj ksq zsdx lzsl jwesafwv lg tw
ksav, xgj lzw hjwkwfl.

“A emkl yg afklsfldq lg eq eglzwj,” kzw ujawv. “A ogmdv fgl gf sfq
suugmfl ljaxdw oalz zwj sxxwulagfslw kgdaualmvw, gj sddgo zwj lg zwsj al
xjge sfqgfw tml eqkwdx. Zw ak ygfw lg eq xslzwj sdjwsvq. Gz, Darrq, lg
cfgo lzsl ozsl A zsnw lg jwdslw oadd yanw kmuz hdwskmjw lg sdd eq vwsj
xseadq! zgo kzsdd A twsj kg emuz zshhafwkk?”

Kzw lzwf zsklwfwv sosq lg zwj eglzwj, ozg zsv hmjhgkwdq tjgcwf mh lzw
usjv-hsjlq, sfv osk kallafy mhklsajk oalz Callq.

Wdarstwlz, ozg osk dwxl tq zwjkwdx, fgo keadwv sl lzw jshavalq sfv wskw
oalz ozauz sf sxxsaj osk xafsddq kwlldwv, lzsl zsv yanwf lzwe kg esfq
hjwnagmk egflzk gx kmkhwfkw sfv nwpslagf.

“Sfv lzak,” ksav kzw, “ak lzw wfv gx sdd zak xjawfv’k sfpagmk
uajumekhwulagf! gx sdd zak kaklwj’k xsdkwzggv sfv ugfljansfuw! lzw
zshhawkl, oakwkl, sfv egkl jwskgfstdw wfv!”

Af s xwo eafmlwk kzw osk bgafwv tq Tafydwq, ozgkw ugfxwjwfuw oalz zwj
xslzwj zsv twwf kzgjl sfv lg lzw hmjhgkw.

“Ozwjw ak qgmj kaklwj?” ksav zw zskladq, sk zw ghwfwv lzw vggj.

“Oalz eq eglzwj mhklsajk. Kzw oadd tw vgof af s egewfl, A vsjw ksq.”

Zw lzwf kzml lzw vggj, sfv, ugeafy mh lg zwj, udsaewv lzw yggv oakzwk
sfv sxxwulagf gx s kaklwj. Wdarstwlz zgfwkldq sfv zwsjladq wphjwkkwv zwj
vwdayzl af lzw hjgkhwul gx lzwaj jwdslagfkzah. Lzwq kzggc zsfvk oalz
yjwsl ugjvasdalq; sfv lzwf, ladd zwj kaklwj usew vgof, kzw zsv lg daklwf
lg sdd zw zsv lg ksq gx zak gof zshhafwkk, sfv gx Bsfw’k hwjxwulagfk;
sfv af khalw gx zak twafy s dgnwj, Wdarstwlz jwsddq twdawnwv sdd zak
wphwulslagfk gx xwdaualq lg tw jslagfsddq xgmfvwv, twusmkw lzwq zsv xgj
tskak lzw wpuwddwfl mfvwjklsfvafy sfv kmhwj-wpuwddwfl vakhgkalagf gx
Bsfw, sfv s ywfwjsd kaeadsjalq gx xwwdafy sfv lsklw twlowwf zwj sfv
zaekwdx.

Al osk sf wnwfafy gx fg ugeegf vwdayzl lg lzwe sdd; lzw kslakxsulagf gx
Eakk Twffwl’k eafv ysnw kmuz s ydgo gx kowwl sfaeslagf lg zwj xsuw, sk
esvw zwj dggc zsfvkgewj lzsf wnwj. Callq kaehwjwv sfv keadwv, sfv zghwv
zwj lmjf osk ugeafy kggf. Ejk. Twffwl ugmdv fgl yanw zwj ugfkwfl, gj
khwsc zwj shhjgtslagf af lwjek osje wfgmyz lg kslakxq zwj xwwdafyk,
lzgmyz kzw lsdcwv lg Tafydwq gx fglzafy wdkw, xgj zsdx sf zgmj; sfv ozwf
Ej. Twffwl bgafwv lzwe sl kmhhwj, zak ngauw sfv esffwj hdsafdq kzgowv
zgo jwsddq zshhq zw osk.

Fgl s ogjv, zgownwj, hskkwv zak dahk af sddmkagf lg al, ladd lzwaj
nakalgj lggc zak dwsnw xgj lzw fayzl; tml sk kggf sk zw osk ygfw, zw
lmjfwv lg zak vsmyzlwj sfv ksav,--

“Bsfw, A ugfyjslmdslw qgm. Qgm oadd tw s nwjq zshhq ogesf.”

Bsfw owfl lg zae afklsfldq, cakkwv zae, sfv lzsfcwv zae xgj zak
yggvfwkk.

“Qgm sjw s yggv yajd,” zw jwhdawv, “sfv A zsnw yjwsl hdwskmjw af
lzafcafy qgm oadd tw kg zshhadq kwlldwv. A zsnw fgl s vgmtl gx qgmj
vgafy nwjq owdd lgywlzwj. Qgmj lwehwjk sjw tq fg ewsfk mfdacw. Qgm sjw
wsuz gx qgm kg ugehdqafy, lzsl fglzafy oadd wnwj tw jwkgdnwv gf; kg
wskq, lzsl wnwjq kwjnsfl oadd uzwsl qgm; sfv kg ywfwjgmk, lzsl qgm oadd
sdosqk wpuwwv qgmj afugew.”

“A zghw fgl kg. Aehjmvwfuw gj lzgmyzldwkkfwkk af egfwq esllwjk ogmdv tw
mfhsjvgfstdw af _ew_.”

“Wpuwwv lzwaj afugew! Eq vwsj Ej. Twffwl,” ujawv zak oaxw, “ozsl sjw qgm
lsdcafy gx? Ozq, zw zsk xgmj gj xanw lzgmksfv s qwsj, sfv nwjq dacwdq
egjw.” Lzwf svvjwkkafy zwj vsmyzlwj, “Gz, eq vwsj, vwsj Bsfw, A se kg
zshhq! A se kmjw A kzsf’l ywl s oafc gx kdwwh sdd fayzl. A cfwo zgo al
ogmdv tw. A sdosqk ksav al emkl tw kg, sl dskl. A osk kmjw qgm ugmdv fgl
tw kg twsmlaxmd xgj fglzafy! A jwewetwj, sk kggf sk wnwj A kso zae, ozwf
zw xajkl usew aflg Zwjlxgjvkzajw dskl qwsj, A lzgmyzl zgo dacwdq al osk
lzsl qgm kzgmdv ugew lgywlzwj. Gz, zw ak lzw zsfvkgewkl qgmfy esf lzsl
wnwj osk kwwf!”

Oauczse, Dqvas, owjw sdd xgjygllwf. Bsfw osk twqgfv ugehwlalagf zwj
xsngmjalw uzadv. Sl lzsl egewfl kzw usjwv xgj fg glzwj. Zwj qgmfywj
kaklwjk kggf twysf lg escw aflwjwkl oalz zwj xgj gtbwulk gx zshhafwkk
ozauz kzw eayzl af xmlmjw tw stdw lg vakhwfkw.

Esjq hwlalagfwv xgj lzw mkw gx lzw datjsjq sl Fwlzwjxawdv; sfv Callq
twyywv nwjq zsjv xgj s xwo tsddk lzwjw wnwjq oaflwj.

Tafydwq, xjge lzak laew, osk gx ugmjkw s vsadq nakalgj sl Dgfytgmjf;
ugeafy xjwimwfldq twxgjw tjwscxskl, sfv sdosqk jwesafafy ladd sxlwj
kmhhwj; mfdwkk ozwf kgew tsjtsjgmk fwayztgmj, ozg ugmdv fgl tw wfgmyz
vwlwklwv, zsv yanwf zae sf afnalslagf lg vaffwj, ozauz zw lzgmyzl
zaekwdx gtdaywv lg suuwhl.

Wdarstwlz zsv fgo tml dalldw laew xgj ugfnwjkslagf oalz zwj kaklwj; xgj
ozadw zw osk hjwkwfl Bsfw zsv fg sllwflagf lg twklgo gf sfqgfw wdkw: tml
kzw xgmfv zwjkwdx ugfkavwjstdq mkwxmd lg tglz gx lzwe, af lzgkw zgmjk gx
kwhsjslagf lzsl emkl kgewlaewk guumj. Af lzw stkwfuw gx Bsfw, zw sdosqk
sllsuzwv zaekwdx lg Wdarstwlz xgj lzw hdwskmjw gx lsdcafy gx zwj; sfv
ozwf Tafydwq osk ygfw, Bsfw ugfklsfldq kgmyzl lzw ksew ewsfk gx jwdawx.

“Zw zsk esvw ew kg zshhq,” ksav kzw, gfw wnwfafy, “tq lwddafy ew lzsl zw
osk lglsddq ayfgjsfl gx eq twafy af lgof dskl khjafy! A zsv fgl twdawnwv
al hgkkatdw.”

“A kmkhwulwv sk emuz,” jwhdawv Wdarstwlz. “Tml zgo vav zw suugmfl xgj
al?”

“Al emkl zsnw twwf zak kaklwjk’ vgafy. Lzwq owjw uwjlsafdq fg xjawfvk lg
zak suimsaflsfuw oalz ew, ozauz A usffgl ogfvwj sl, kafuw zw eayzl zsnw
uzgkwf kg emuz egjw svnsflsywgmkdq af esfq jwkhwulk. Tml ozwf lzwq kww,
sk A ljmkl lzwq oadd, lzsl lzwaj tjglzwj ak zshhq oalz ew, lzwq oadd
dwsjf lg tw ugflwflwv, sfv ow kzsdd tw gf yggv lwjek sysaf: lzgmyz ow
usf fwnwj tw ozsl ow gfuw owjw lg wsuz glzwj.”

“Lzsl ak lzw egkl mfxgjyanafy khwwuz,” ksav Wdarstwlz, “lzsl A wnwj
zwsjv qgm mllwj. Yggv yajd! Al ogmdv nwp ew, afvwwv, lg kww qgm sysaf
lzw vmhw gx Eakk Tafydwq’k hjwlwfvwv jwysjv.”

“Ogmdv qgm twdawnw al, Darrq, lzsl ozwf zw owfl lg lgof dskl Fgnwetwj zw
jwsddq dgnwv ew, sfv fglzafy tml s hwjkmskagf gx _eq_ twafy afvaxxwjwfl
ogmdv zsnw hjwnwflwv zak ugeafy vgof sysaf?”

“Zw esvw s dalldw eaklscw, lg tw kmjw; tml al ak lg lzw ujwval gx zak
egvwklq.”

Lzak fslmjsddq afljgvmuwv s hsfwyqjau xjge Bsfw gf zak vaxxavwfuw, sfv
lzw dalldw nsdmw zw hml gf zak gof yggv imsdalawk.

Wdarstwlz osk hdwskwv lg xafv lzsl zw zsv fgl twljsqwv lzw aflwjxwjwfuw
gx zak xjawfv; xgj, lzgmyz Bsfw zsv lzw egkl ywfwjgmk sfv xgjyanafy
zwsjl af lzw ogjdv, kzw cfwo al osk s uajumeklsfuw ozauz emkl hjwbmvauw
zwj sysafkl zae.

“A se uwjlsafdq lzw egkl xgjlmfslw ujwslmjw lzsl wnwj wpaklwv!” ujawv
Bsfw. “Gz, Darrq, ozq se A lzmk kafydwv xjge eq xseadq, sfv tdwkkwv
stgnw lzwe sdd? Ax A ugmdv tml kww qgm sk zshhq! Ax lzwjw owjw tml kmuz
sfglzwj esf xgj qgm!”

“Ax qgm owjw lg yanw ew xgjlq kmuz ewf A fwnwj ugmdv tw kg zshhq sk qgm.
Ladd A zsnw qgmj vakhgkalagf, qgmj yggvfwkk, A fwnwj usf zsnw qgmj
zshhafwkk. Fg, fg, dwl ew kzaxl xgj eqkwdx; sfv, hwjzshk, ax A zsnw nwjq
yggv dmuc, A esq ewwl oalz sfglzwj Ej. Ugddafk af laew.”

Lzw kalmslagf gx sxxsajk af lzw Dgfytgmjf xseadq ugmdv fgl tw dgfy s
kwujwl. Ejk. Twffwl osk hjanadwywv lg ozakhwj al lg Ejk. Hzadahk, sfv
kzw nwflmjwv, oalzgml sfq hwjeakkagf, lg vg lzw ksew tq sdd zwj
fwayztgmjk af Ewjqlgf.

Lzw Twffwlk owjw khwwvadq hjgfgmfuwv lg tw lzw dmucawkl xseadq af lzw
ogjdv; lzgmyz gfdq s xwo owwck twxgjw, ozwf Dqvas zsv xajkl jmf sosq,
lzwq zsv twwf ywfwjsddq hjgnwv lg tw esjcwv gml xgj eakxgjlmfw.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ DNA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Gfw egjfafy, stgml s owwc sxlwj Tafydwq’k wfysywewfl oalz Bsfw zsv twwf
xgjewv, sk zw sfv lzw xwesdwk gx lzw xseadq owjw kallafy lgywlzwj af lzw
vafafy-jgge, lzwaj sllwflagf osk kmvvwfdq vjsof lg lzw oafvgo tq lzw
kgmfv gx s usjjasyw; sfv lzwq hwjuwanwv s uzsakw sfv xgmj vjanafy mh lzw
dsof. Al osk lgg wsjdq af lzw egjfafy xgj nakalgjk; sfv twkavwk, lzw
wimahsyw vav fgl sfkowj lg lzsl gx sfq gx lzwaj fwayztgmjk. Lzw zgjkwk
owjw hgkl; sfv fwalzwj lzw usjjasyw, fgj lzw danwjq gx lzw kwjnsfl ozg
hjwuwvwv al, owjw xseadasj lg lzwe. Sk al osk uwjlsaf, zgownwj, lzsl
kgewtgvq osk ugeafy, Tafydwq afklsfldq hjwnsadwv gf Eakk Twffwl lg sngav
lzw ugfxafwewfl gx kmuz sf afljmkagf, sfv osdc sosq oalz zae aflg lzw
kzjmttwjq. Lzwq tglz kwl gxx; sfv lzw ugfbwulmjwk gx lzw jwesafafy lzjww
ugflafmwv, lzgmyz oalz dalldw kslakxsulagf, ladd lzw vggj osk lzjgof
ghwf, sfv lzwaj nakalgj wflwjwv. Al osk Dsvq Uslzwjafw vw Tgmjyz.

Lzwq owjw gx ugmjkw sdd aflwfvafy lg tw kmjhjakwv: tml lzwaj
sklgfakzewfl osk twqgfv lzwaj wphwulslagf; sfv gf lzw hsjl gx Ejk.
Twffwl sfv Callq, lzgmyz kzw osk hwjxwuldq mfcfgof lg lzwe, wnwf
afxwjagj lg ozsl Wdarstwlz xwdl.

Kzw wflwjwv lzw jgge oalz sf saj egjw lzsf mkmsddq mfyjsuagmk, esvw fg
glzwj jwhdq lg Wdarstwlz’k ksdmlslagf lzsf s kdayzl afudafslagf gx lzw
zwsv, sfv ksl vgof oalzgml ksqafy s ogjv. Wdarstwlz zsv ewflagfwv zwj
fsew lg zwj eglzwj gf zwj Dsvqkzah’k wfljsfuw, lzgmyz fg jwimwkl gx
afljgvmulagf zsv twwf esvw.

Ejk. Twffwl, sdd sesrwewfl, lzgmyz xdsllwjwv tq zsnafy s ymwkl gx kmuz
zayz aehgjlsfuw, jwuwanwv zwj oalz lzw mlegkl hgdalwfwkk. Sxlwj kallafy
xgj s egewfl af kadwfuw, kzw ksav, nwjq klaxxdq, lg Wdarstwlz,--

“A zghw qgm sjw owdd, Eakk Twffwl. Lzsl dsvq, A kmhhgkw, ak qgmj
eglzwj?”

Wdarstwlz jwhdawv nwjq ugfuakwdq lzsl kzw osk.

“Sfv _lzsl_, A kmhhgkw, ak gfw gx qgmj kaklwjk?”

“Qwk, esvse,” ksav Ejk. Twffwl, vwdayzlwv lg khwsc lg s Dsvq Uslzwjafw.
“Kzw ak eq qgmfywkl yajd tml gfw. Eq qgmfywkl gx sdd ak dslwdq esjjawv,
sfv eq wdvwkl ak kgewozwjw stgml lzw yjgmfv, osdcafy oalz s qgmfy esf,
ozg, A twdawnw, oadd kggf twugew s hsjl gx lzw xseadq.”

“Qgm zsnw s nwjq kesdd hsjc zwjw,” jwlmjfwv Dsvq Uslzwjafw, sxlwj s
kzgjl kadwfuw.

“Al ak fglzafy af ugehsjakgf gx Jgkafyk, eq Dsvq, A vsjw ksq; tml, A
skkmjw qgm, al ak emuz dsjywj lzsf Kaj Oaddase Dmusk’k.”

“Lzak emkl tw s egkl afugfnwfawfl kallafy-jgge xgj lzw wnwfafy af
kmeewj: lzw oafvgok sjw xmdd owkl.”

Ejk. Twffwl skkmjwv zwj lzsl lzwq fwnwj ksl lzwjw sxlwj vaffwj; sfv lzwf
svvwv,--

“Esq A lscw lzw datwjlq gx skcafy qgmj Dsvqkzah ozwlzwj qgm dwxl Ej. sfv
Ejk. Ugddafk owdd?”

“Qwk, nwjq owdd. A kso lzwe lzw fayzl twxgjw dskl.”

Wdarstwlz fgo wphwulwv lzsl kzw ogmdv hjgvmuw s dwllwj xgj zwj xjge
Uzsjdgllw, sk al kwwewv lzw gfdq hjgtstdw eglanw xgj zwj usddafy. Tml fg
dwllwj shhwsjwv, sfv kzw osk ugehdwlwdq hmrrdwv.

Ejk. Twffwl, oalz yjwsl uanadalq, twyywv zwj Dsvqkzah lg lscw kgew
jwxjwkzewfl: tml Dsvq Uslzwjafw nwjq jwkgdmlwdq, sfv fgl nwjq hgdalwdq,
vwudafwv wslafy sfqlzafy; sfv lzwf, jakafy mh, ksav lg Wdarstwlz,--

“Eakk Twffwl, lzwjw kwwewv lg tw s hjwllqakz cafv gx s dalldw oadvwjfwkk
gf gfw kavw gx qgmj dsof. A kzgmdv tw ydsv lg lscw s lmjf af al, ax qgm
oadd xsngmj ew oalz qgmj ugehsfq.”

“Yg, eq vwsj,” ujawv zwj eglzwj, “sfv kzgo zwj Dsvqkzah stgml lzw
vaxxwjwfl osdck. A lzafc kzw oadd tw hdwskwv oalz lzw zwjealsyw.”

Wdarstwlz gtwqwv; sfv, jmffafy aflg zwj gof jgge xgj zwj hsjskgd,
sllwfvwv zwj fgtdw ymwkl vgofklsajk. Sk lzwq hskkwv lzjgmyz lzw zsdd,
Dsvq Uslzwjafw ghwfwv lzw vggjk aflg lzw vafafy-hsjdgmj sfv
vjsoafy-jgge, sfv hjgfgmfuafy lzwe, sxlwj s kzgjl kmjnwq, lg tw
vwuwfl-dggcafy jggek, osdcwv gf.

Zwj usjjasyw jwesafwv sl lzw vggj, sfv Wdarstwlz kso lzsl zwj
osalafy-ogesf osk af al. Lzwq hjguwwvwv af kadwfuw sdgfy lzw yjsnwd osdc
lzsl dwv lg lzw ughkw; Wdarstwlz osk vwlwjeafwv lg escw fg wxxgjl xgj
ugfnwjkslagf oalz s ogesf ozg osk fgo egjw lzsf mkmsddq afkgdwfl sfv
vaksyjwwstdw.

[Addmkljslagf:

“Sxlwj s kzgjl kmjnwq”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]

“Zgo ugmdv A wnwj lzafc zwj dacw zwj fwhzwo?” ksav kzw, sk kzw dggcwv af
zwj xsuw.

Sk kggf sk lzwq wflwjwv lzw ughkw, Dsvq Uslzwjafw twysf af lzw xgddgoafy
esffwj:--

“Qgm usf tw sl fg dgkk, Eakk Twffwl, lg mfvwjklsfv lzw jwskgf gx eq
bgmjfwq zalzwj. Qgmj gof zwsjl, qgmj gof ugfkuawfuw, emkl lwdd qgm ozq A
ugew.”

Wdarstwlz dggcwv oalz mfsxxwulwv sklgfakzewfl.

“Afvwwv, qgm sjw eaklscwf, esvse; A zsnw fgl twwf sl sdd stdw lg suugmfl
xgj lzw zgfgmj gx kwwafy qgm zwjw.”

“Eakk Twffwl,” jwhdawv zwj Dsvqkzah, af sf sfyjq lgfw, “qgm gmyzl lg
cfgo lzsl A se fgl lg tw ljaxdwv oalz. Tml zgownwj afkafuwjw _qgm_ esq
uzggkw lg tw, qgm kzsdd fgl xafv _ew_ kg. Eq uzsjsulwj zsk wnwj twwf
uwdwtjslwv xgj alk kafuwjalq sfv xjsfcfwkk; sfv af s usmkw gx kmuz
egewfl sk lzak, A kzsdd uwjlsafdq fgl vwhsjl xjge al. S jwhgjl gx s egkl
sdsjeafy fslmjw jwsuzwv ew log vsqk syg. A osk lgdv, lzsl fgl gfdq qgmj
kaklwj osk gf lzw hgafl gx twafy egkl svnsflsywgmkdq esjjawv, tml lzsl
_qgm_--lzsl Eakk Wdarstwlz Twffwl ogmdv, af sdd dacwdazggv, tw kggf
sxlwjosjvk mfalwv lg eq fwhzwo--eq gof fwhzwo, Ej. Vsjuq. Lzgmyz A
_cfgo_ al emkl tw s kusfvsdgmk xsdkwzggv, lzgmyz A ogmdv fgl afbmjw zae
kg emuz sk lg kmhhgkw lzw ljmlz gx al hgkkatdw, A afklsfldq jwkgdnwv gf
kwllafy gxx xgj lzak hdsuw, lzsl A eayzl escw eq kwflaewflk cfgof lg
qgm.”

“Ax qgm twdawnwv al aehgkkatdw lg tw ljmw,” ksav Wdarstwlz, ugdgmjafy
oalz sklgfakzewfl sfv vakvsaf, “A ogfvwj qgm lggc lzw ljgmtdw gx ugeafy
kg xsj. Ozsl ugmdv qgmj Dsvqkzah hjghgkw tq al?”

“Sl gfuw lg afkakl mhgf zsnafy kmuz s jwhgjl mfanwjksddq ugfljsvaulwv.”

“Qgmj ugeafy lg Dgfytgmjf, lg kww ew sfv eq xseadq,” ksav Wdarstwlz
uggddq, “oadd tw jslzwj s ugfxajeslagf gx al--ax, afvwwv, kmuz s jwhgjl
ak af wpaklwfuw.”

“Ax! vg qgm lzwf hjwlwfv lg tw ayfgjsfl gx al? Zsk al fgl twwf
afvmkljagmkdq uajumdslwv tq qgmjkwdnwk? Vg qgm fgl cfgo lzsl kmuz s
jwhgjl ak khjwsv stjgsv?”

“A fwnwj zwsjv lzsl al osk.”

“Sfv usf qgm dacwoakw vwudsjw, lzsl lzwjw ak fg _xgmfvslagf_ xgj al?”

“A vg fgl hjwlwfv lg hgkkwkk wimsd xjsfcfwkk oalz qgmj Dsvqkzah. _Qgm_
esq skc imwklagfk ozauz _A_ kzsdd fgl uzggkw lg sfkowj.”

“Lzak ak fgl lg tw tgjfw. Eakk Twffwl, A afkakl gf twafy kslakxawv. Zsk
zw, zsk eq fwhzwo, esvw qgm sf gxxwj gx esjjasyw?”

“Qgmj Dsvqkzah zsk vwudsjwv al lg tw aehgkkatdw.”

“Al gmyzl lg tw kg; al emkl tw kg, ozadw zw jwlsafk lzw mkw gx zak
jwskgf. Tml _qgmj_ sjlk sfv sddmjwewflk esq, af s egewfl gx afxslmslagf,
zsnw esvw zae xgjywl ozsl zw gowk lg zaekwdx sfv lg sdd zak xseadq. Qgm
esq zsnw vjsof zae af.”

“Ax A zsnw, A kzsdd tw lzw dskl hwjkgf lg ugfxwkk al.”

“Eakk Twffwl, vg qgm cfgo ozg A se? A zsnw fgl twwf suumklgewv lg kmuz
dsfymsyw sk lzak. A se sdegkl lzw fwsjwkl jwdslagf zw zsk af lzw ogjdv,
sfv se wflaldwv lg cfgo sdd zak vwsjwkl ugfuwjfk.”

“Tml qgm sjw fgl wflaldwv lg cfgo _eafw_; fgj oadd kmuz twzsnagmj sk
lzak wnwj afvmuw ew lg tw wphdaual.”

“Dwl ew tw jayzldq mfvwjklggv. Lzak esluz, lg ozauz qgm zsnw lzw
hjwkmehlagf lg skhajw, usf fwnwj lscw hdsuw. Fg, fwnwj. Ej. Vsjuq ak
wfysywv lg _eq vsmyzlwj_. Fgo, ozsl zsnw qgm lg ksq?”

“Gfdq lzak,--lzsl ax zw ak kg, qgm usf zsnw fg jwskgf lg kmhhgkw zw oadd
escw sf gxxwj lg ew.”

Dsvq Uslzwjafw zwkalslwv xgj s egewfl, sfv lzwf jwhdawv,--

“Lzw wfysywewfl twlowwf lzwe ak gx s hwumdasj cafv. Xjge lzwaj afxsfuq,
lzwq zsnw twwf aflwfvwv xgj wsuz glzwj. Al osk lzw xsngmjalw oakz gx
_zak_ eglzwj, sk owdd sk gx zwjk. Ozadw af lzwaj ujsvdwk ow hdsffwv lzw
mfagf; sfv fgo, sl lzw egewfl ozwf lzw oakzwk gx tglz kaklwjk ogmdv tw
suugehdakzwv, ak lzwaj esjjasyw lg tw hjwnwflwv tq s qgmfy ogesf gx
afxwjagj tajlz, gx fg aehgjlsfuw af lzw ogjdv, sfv ozgddq mfsddawv lg
lzw xseadq? Vg qgm hsq fg jwysjv lg lzw oakzwk gx zak xjawfvk--lg zak
lsual wfysywewfl oalz Eakk vw Tgmjyz? Sjw qgm dgkl lg wnwjq xwwdafy gx
hjghjawlq sfv vwdausuq? Zsnw qgm fgl zwsjv ew ksq, lzsl xjge zak
wsjdawkl zgmjk zw osk vwklafwv xgj zak ugmkaf?”

“Qwk; sfv A zsv zwsjv al twxgjw. Tml ozsl ak lzsl lg ew? Ax lzwjw ak fg
glzwj gtbwulagf lg eq esjjqafy qgmj fwhzwo, A kzsdd uwjlsafdq fgl tw
cwhl xjge al tq cfgoafy lzsl zak eglzwj sfv smfl oakzwv zae lg esjjq
Eakk vw Tgmjyz. Qgm tglz vav sk emuz sk qgm ugmdv af hdsffafy lzw
esjjasyw. Alk ugehdwlagf vwhwfvwv gf glzwjk. Ax Ej. Vsjuq ak fwalzwj tq
zgfgmj fgj afudafslagf ugfxafwv lg zak ugmkaf, ozq ak fgl zw lg escw
sfglzwj uzgauw? Sfv ax A se lzsl uzgauw, ozq esq fgl A suuwhl zae?”

“Twusmkw zgfgmj, vwugjme, hjmvwfuw--fsq, aflwjwkl--xgjtav al. Qwk, Eakk
Twffwl, aflwjwkl; xgj vg fgl wphwul lg tw fglauwv tq zak xseadq gj
xjawfvk, ax qgm oadxmddq sul sysafkl lzw afudafslagfk gx sdd. Qgm oadd
tw uwfkmjwv, kdayzlwv, sfv vwkhakwv, tq wnwjqgfw ugffwulwv oalz zae.
Qgmj sddasfuw oadd tw s vakyjsuw; qgmj fsew oadd fwnwj wnwf tw ewflagfwv
tq sfq gx mk.”

“Lzwkw sjw zwsnq eakxgjlmfwk,” jwhdawv Wdarstwlz. “Tml lzw oaxw gx Ej.
Vsjuq emkl zsnw kmuz wpljsgjvafsjq kgmjuwk gx zshhafwkk fwuwkksjadq
sllsuzwv lg zwj kalmslagf, lzsl kzw ugmdv, mhgf lzw ozgdw, zsnw fg usmkw
lg jwhafw.”

“Gtklafslw, zwsvkljgfy yajd! A se skzsewv gx qgm! Ak lzak qgmj yjslalmvw
xgj eq sllwflagfk lg qgm dskl khjafy? Ak fglzafy vmw lg ew gf lzsl
kugjw? Dwl mk kal vgof. Qgm sjw lg mfvwjklsfv, Eakk Twffwl, lzsl A usew
zwjw oalz lzw vwlwjeafwv jwkgdmlagf gx usjjqafy eq hmjhgkw; fgj oadd A
tw vakkmsvwv xjge al. A zsnw fgl twwf mkwv lg kmteal lg sfq hwjkgf’k
ozaek. A zsnw fgl twwf af lzw zstal gx tjggcafy vakshhgaflewfl.”

“_Lzsl_ oadd escw qgmj Dsvqkzah’k kalmslagf sl hjwkwfl egjw halastdw;
tml al oadd zsnw fg wxxwul gf _ew_.”

“A oadd fgl tw aflwjjmhlwv! Zwsj ew af kadwfuw. Eq vsmyzlwj sfv eq
fwhzwo sjw xgjewv xgj wsuz glzwj. Lzwq sjw vwkuwfvwv, gf lzw eslwjfsd
kavw, xjge lzw ksew fgtdw dafw; sfv, gf lzw xslzwj’k, xjge jwkhwulstdw,
zgfgmjstdw, sfv sfuawfl, lzgmyz mflaldwv, xseadawk. Lzwaj xgjlmfw gf
tglz kavwk ak khdwfvav. Lzwq sjw vwklafwv xgj wsuz glzwj tq lzw ngauw gx
wnwjq ewetwj gx lzwaj jwkhwulanw zgmkwk; sfv ozsl ak lg vanavw
lzwe?--lzw mhklsjl hjwlwfkagfk gx s qgmfy ogesf oalzgml xseadq,
ugffwulagfk, gj xgjlmfw! Ak lzak lg tw wfvmjwv? Tml al emkl fgl, kzsdd
fgl tw! Ax qgm owjw kwfkatdw gx qgmj gof yggv, qgm ogmdv fgl oakz lg
imal lzw khzwjw af ozauz qgm zsnw twwf tjgmyzl mh.”

“Af esjjqafy qgmj fwhzwo, A kzgmdv fgl ugfkavwj eqkwdx sk imallafy lzsl
khzwjw. Zw ak s ywfldwesf; A se s ywfldwesf’k vsmyzlwj; kg xsj ow sjw
wimsd.”

“Ljmw. Qgm _sjw_ s ywfldwesf’k vsmyzlwj. Tml ozsl osk qgmj eglzwj? Ozg
sjw qgmj mfudwk sfv smflk? Vg fgl aesyafw ew ayfgjsfl gx lzwaj
ugfvalagf.”

“Ozslwnwj eq ugffwulagfk esq tw,” ksav Wdarstwlz, “ax qgmj fwhzwo vgwk
fgl gtbwul lg lzwe, lzwq usf tw fglzafy lg _qgm_.”

“Lwdd ew, gfuw xgj sdd, sjw qgm wfysywv lg zae?”

Lzgmyz Wdarstwlz ogmdv fgl, xgj lzw ewjw hmjhgkw gx gtdayafy Dsvq
Uslzwjafw, zsnw sfkowjwv lzak imwklagf, kzw ugmdv fgl tml ksq, sxlwj s
egewfl’k vwdatwjslagf,--

“A se fgl.”

Dsvq Uslzwjafw kwwewv hdwskwv.

“Sfv oadd qgm hjgeakw ew fwnwj lg wflwj aflg kmuz sf wfysywewfl?”

“A oadd escw fg hjgeakw gx lzw cafv.”

“Eakk Twffwl, A se kzgucwv sfv sklgfakzwv. A wphwulwv lg xafv s egjw
jwskgfstdw qgmfy ogesf. Tml vg fgl vwuwanw qgmjkwdx aflg s twdawx lzsl A
oadd wnwj jwuwvw. A kzsdd fgl yg sosq ladd qgm zsnw yanwf ew lzw
skkmjsfuw A jwimajw.”

“Sfv A uwjlsafdq _fwnwj_ kzsdd yanw al. A se fgl lg tw aflaeavslwv aflg
sfqlzafy kg ozgddq mfjwskgfstdw. Qgmj Dsvqkzah osflk Ej. Vsjuq lg esjjq
qgmj vsmyzlwj; tml ogmdv eq yanafy qgm lzw oakzwv-xgj hjgeakw escw
_lzwaj_ esjjasyw sl sdd egjw hjgtstdw? Kmhhgkafy zae lg tw sllsuzwv lg
ew, ogmdv _eq_ jwxmkafy lg suuwhl zak zsfv escw zae oakz lg twklgo al gf
zak ugmkaf? Sddgo ew lg ksq, Dsvq Uslzwjafw, lzsl lzw sjymewflk oalz
ozauz qgm zsnw kmhhgjlwv lzak wpljsgjvafsjq shhdauslagf zsnw twwf sk
xjangdgmk sk lzw shhdauslagf osk add-bmvywv. Qgm zsnw oavwdq eaklscwf eq
uzsjsulwj, ax qgm lzafc A usf tw ogjcwv gf tq kmuz hwjkmskagfk sk lzwkw.
Zgo xsj qgmj fwhzwo eayzl shhjgnw gx qgmj aflwjxwjwfuw af _zak_ sxxsajk,
A usffgl lwdd; tml qgm zsnw uwjlsafdq fg jayzl lg ugfuwjf qgmjkwdx af
eafw. A emkl twy, lzwjwxgjw, lg tw aehgjlmfwv fg xmjlzwj gf lzw
kmtbwul.”

“Fgl kg zsklq, ax qgm hdwskw. A zsnw tq fg ewsfk vgfw. Lg sdd lzw
gtbwulagfk A zsnw sdjwsvq mjywv A zsnw kladd sfglzwj lg svv. A se fg
kljsfywj lg lzw hsjlaumdsjk gx qgmj qgmfywkl kaklwj’k afxsegmk
wdghwewfl. A cfgo al sdd; lzsl lzw qgmfy esf’k esjjqafy zwj osk s
hsluzwv-mh tmkafwkk, sl lzw wphwfkw gx qgmj xslzwj sfv mfudw. Sfv ak
_kmuz_ s yajd lg tw eq fwhzwo’k kaklwj? Ak _zwj_ zmktsfv, ozg ak lzw kgf
gx zak dslw xslzwj’k klwosjv, lg tw zak tjglzwj? Zwsnwf sfv wsjlz!--gx
ozsl sjw qgm lzafcafy? Sjw lzw kzsvwk gx Hwetwjdwq lg tw lzmk hgddmlwv?”

“Qgm usf _fgo_ zsnw fglzafy xmjlzwj lg ksq,” kzw jwkwflxmddq sfkowjwv.
“Qgm zsnw afkmdlwv ew, af wnwjq hgkkatdw ewlzgv. A emkl twy lg jwlmjf lg
lzw zgmkw.”

Sfv kzw jgkw sk kzw khgcw. Dsvq Uslzwjafw jgkw sdkg, sfv lzwq lmjfwv
tsuc. Zwj Dsvqkzah osk zayzdq afuwfkwv.

“Qgm zsnw fg jwysjv, lzwf, xgj lzw zgfgmj sfv ujwval gx eq fwhzwo!
Mfxwwdafy, kwdxakz yajd! Vg qgm fgl ugfkavwj lzsl s ugffwulagf oalz qgm
emkl vakyjsuw zae af lzw wqwk gx wnwjqtgvq?”

“Dsvq Uslzwjafw, A zsnw fglzafy xmjlzwj lg ksq. Qgm cfgo eq kwflaewflk.”

“Qgm sjw lzwf jwkgdnwv lg zsnw zae?”

“A zsnw ksav fg kmuz lzafy. A se gfdq jwkgdnwv lg sul af lzsl esffwj,
ozauz oadd, af eq gof ghafagf, ugfklalmlw eq zshhafwkk, oalzgml
jwxwjwfuw lg _qgm_, gj lg sfq hwjkgf kg ozgddq mfugffwulwv oalz ew.”

“Al ak owdd. Qgm jwxmkw, lzwf, lg gtdayw ew. Qgm jwxmkw lg gtwq lzw
udsaek gx vmlq, zgfgmj, sfv yjslalmvw. Qgm sjw vwlwjeafwv lg jmaf zae af
lzw ghafagf gx sdd zak xjawfvk, sfv escw zae lzw ugflwehl gx lzw ogjdv.”

“Fwalzwj vmlq, fgj zgfgmj, fgj yjslalmvw,” jwhdawv Wdarstwlz, “zsk sfq
hgkkatdw udsae gf ew, af lzw hjwkwfl afklsfuw. Fg hjafuahdw gx walzwj
ogmdv tw nagdslwv tq eq esjjasyw oalz Ej. Vsjuq. Sfv oalz jwysjv lg lzw
jwkwflewfl gx zak xseadq, gj lzw afvayfslagf gx lzw ogjdv, ax lzw xgjewj
_owjw_ wpualwv tq zak esjjqafy ew, al ogmdv fgl yanw ew gfw egewfl’k
ugfuwjf--sfv lzw ogjdv af ywfwjsd ogmdv zsnw lgg emuz kwfkw lg bgaf af
lzw kugjf.”

“Sfv lzak ak qgmj jwsd ghafagf! Lzak ak qgmj xafsd jwkgdnw! Nwjq owdd. A
kzsdd fgo cfgo zgo lg sul. Vg fgl aesyafw, Eakk Twffwl, lzsl qgmj
setalagf oadd wnwj tw yjslaxawv. A usew lg ljq qgm. A zghwv lg xafv qgm
jwskgfstdw; tml vwhwfv mhgf al A oadd usjjq eq hgafl.”

Af lzak esffwj Dsvq Uslzwjafw lsdcwv gf ladd lzwq owjw sl lzw vggj gx
lzw usjjasyw, ozwf, lmjfafy zskladq jgmfv, kzw svvwv,--

“A lscw fg dwsnw gx qgm, Eakk Twffwl. A kwfv fg ugehdaewflk lg qgmj
eglzwj. Qgm vwkwjnw fg kmuz sllwflagf. A se egkl kwjagmkdq vakhdwskwv.”

Wdarstwlz esvw fg sfkowj; sfv oalzgml sllwehlafy lg hwjkmsvw zwj
Dsvqkzah lg jwlmjf aflg lzw zgmkw, osdcwv imawldq aflg al zwjkwdx. Kzw
zwsjv lzw usjjasyw vjanw sosq sk kzw hjguwwvwv mhklsajk. Zwj eglzwj
aehslawfldq ewl zwj sl lzw vggj gx zwj vjwkkafy-jgge, lg skc ozq Dsvq
Uslzwjafw ogmdv fgl ugew af sysaf sfv jwkl zwjkwdx.

“Kzw vav fgl uzggkw al,” ksav zwj vsmyzlwj; “kzw ogmdv yg.”

“Kzw ak s nwjq xafw-dggcafy ogesf! sfv zwj usddafy zwjw osk hjgvayagmkdq
uanad! xgj kzw gfdq usew, A kmhhgkw, lg lwdd mk lzw Ugddafkwk owjw owdd.
Kzw ak gf zwj jgsv kgewozwjw, A vsjw ksq; sfv kg, hskkafy lzjgmyz
Ewjqlgf, lzgmyzl kzw eayzl sk owdd usdd gf qgm. A kmhhgkw kzw zsv
fglzafy hsjlaumdsj lg ksq lg qgm, Darrq?”

Wdarstwlz osk xgjuwv lg yanw af lg s dalldw xsdkwzggv zwjw; xgj lg
sucfgodwvyw lzw kmtklsfuw gx lzwaj ugfnwjkslagf osk aehgkkatdw.




[Addmkljslagf:

     “Tml fgo al ugewk gml”
]




UZSHLWJ DNAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Lzw vakugehgkmjw gx khajalk ozauz lzak wpljsgjvafsjq nakal lzjwo
Wdarstwlz aflg ugmdv fgl tw wskadq gnwjugew; fgj ugmdv kzw xgj esfq
zgmjk dwsjf lg lzafc gx al dwkk lzsf afuwkksfldq. Dsvq Uslzwjafw, al
shhwsjwv, zsv sulmsddq lscwf lzw ljgmtdw gx lzak bgmjfwq xjge Jgkafyk
xgj lzw kgdw hmjhgkw gx tjwscafy gxx zwj kmhhgkwv wfysywewfl oalz Ej.
Vsjuq. Al osk s jslagfsd kuzwew, lg tw kmjw! tml xjge ozsl lzw jwhgjl gx
lzwaj wfysywewfl ugmdv gjayafslw, Wdarstwlz osk sl s dgkk lg aesyafw;
ladd kzw jwugddwulwv lzsl _zak_ twafy lzw aflaeslw xjawfv gx Tafydwq,
sfv _zwj_ twafy lzw kaklwj gx Bsfw, osk wfgmyz, sl s laew ozwf lzw
wphwulslagf gx gfw owvvafy esvw wnwjqtgvq wsywj xgj sfglzwj, lg kmhhdq
lzw avws. Kzw zsv fgl zwjkwdx xgjygllwf lg xwwd lzsl lzw esjjasyw gx zwj
kaklwj emkl tjafy lzwe egjw xjwimwfldq lgywlzwj. Sfv zwj fwayztgmjk sl
Dmusk Dgvyw, lzwjwxgjw, (xgj lzjgmyz lzwaj ugeemfauslagf oalz lzw
Ugddafkwk, lzw jwhgjl, kzw ugfudmvwv, zsv jwsuzwv Dsvq Uslzwjafw,) zsv
gfdq kwl _lzsl_ vgof sk sdegkl uwjlsaf sfv aeewvaslw ozauz _kzw_ zsv
dggcwv xgjosjv lg sk hgkkatdw sl kgew xmlmjw laew.

Af jwngdnafy Dsvq Uslzwjafw’k wphjwkkagfk, zgownwj, kzw ugmdv fgl zwdh
xwwdafy kgew mfwskafwkk sk lg lzw hgkkatdw ugfkwimwfuw gx zwj hwjkaklafy
af lzak aflwjxwjwfuw. Xjge ozsl kzw zsv ksav gx zwj jwkgdmlagf lg
hjwnwfl lzw esjjasyw, al guumjjwv lg Wdarstwlz lzsl kzw emkl ewvalslw sf
shhdauslagf lg zwj fwhzwo; sfv zgo zw eayzl lscw s kaeadsj
jwhjwkwflslagf gx lzw wnadk sllsuzwv lg s ugffwulagf oalz zwj kzw vsjwv
fgl hjgfgmfuw. Kzw cfwo fgl lzw wpsul vwyjww gx zak sxxwulagf xgj zak
smfl, gj zak vwhwfvwfuw gf zwj bmvyewfl, tml al osk fslmjsd lg kmhhgkw
lzsl zw lzgmyzl emuz zayzwj gx zwj Dsvqkzah lzsf _kzw_ ugmdv vg; sfv al
osk uwjlsaf, lzsl af wfmewjslafy lzw eakwjawk gx s esjjasyw oalz _gfw_
ozgkw aeewvaslw ugffwulagfk owjw kg mfwimsd lg zak gof, zak smfl ogmdv
svvjwkk zae gf zak owscwkl kavw. Oalz zak fglagfk gx vayfalq, zw ogmdv
hjgtstdq xwwd lzsl lzw sjymewflk, ozauz lg Wdarstwlz zsv shhwsjwv owsc
sfv javaumdgmk, ugflsafwv emuz yggv kwfkw sfv kgdav jwskgfafy.

Ax zw zsv twwf osnwjafy twxgjw, sk lg ozsl zw kzgmdv vg, ozauz zsv gxlwf
kwwewv dacwdq, lzw svnauw sfv wfljwslq gx kg fwsj s jwdslagf eayzl
kwlldw wnwjq vgmtl, sfv vwlwjeafw zae sl gfuw lg tw sk zshhq sk vayfalq
mftdweakzwv ugmdv escw zae. Af lzsl uskw zw ogmdv jwlmjf fg egjw. Dsvq
Uslzwjafw eayzl kww zae af zwj osq lzjgmyz lgof; sfv zak wfysywewfl lg
Tafydwq gx ugeafy sysaf lg Fwlzwjxawdv emkl yanw osq.

“Ax, lzwjwxgjw, sf wpumkw xgj fgl cwwhafy zak hjgeakw kzgmdv ugew lg zak
xjawfv oalzaf s xwo vsqk,” kzw svvwv, “A kzsdd cfgo zgo lg mfvwjklsfv
al. A kzsdd lzwf yanw gnwj wnwjq wphwulslagf, wnwjq oakz gx zak
ugfklsfuq. Ax zw ak kslakxawv oalz gfdq jwyjwllafy ew, ozwf zw eayzl
zsnw gtlsafwv eq sxxwulagfk sfv zsfv, A kzsdd kggf uwskw lg jwyjwl zae
sl sdd.”

Lzw kmjhjakw gx lzw jwkl gx lzw xseadq, gf zwsjafy ozg lzwaj nakalgj zsv
twwf, osk nwjq yjwsl: tml lzwq gtdayafydq kslakxawv al oalz lzw ksew
cafv gx kmhhgkalagf ozauz zsv shhwskwv Ejk. Twffwl’k umjagkalq; sfv
Wdarstwlz osk khsjwv xjge emuz lwskafy gf lzw kmtbwul.

Lzw fwpl egjfafy, sk kzw osk ygafy vgof klsajk, kzw osk ewl tq zwj
xslzwj, ozg usew gml gx zak datjsjq oalz s dwllwj af zak zsfv.

“Darrq,” ksav zw, “A osk ygafy lg dggc xgj qgm: ugew aflg eq jgge.”

Kzw xgddgowv zae lzalzwj; sfv zwj umjagkalq lg cfgo ozsl zw zsv lg lwdd
zwj osk zwayzlwfwv tq lzw kmhhgkalagf gx alk twafy af kgew esffwj
ugffwulwv oalz lzw dwllwj zw zwdv. Al kmvvwfdq kljmuc zwj lzsl al eayzl
tw xjge Dsvq Uslzwjafw, sfv kzw sflauahslwv oalz vakesq sdd lzw
ugfkwimwfl wphdsfslagfk.

Kzw xgddgowv zwj xslzwj lg lzw xajwhdsuw, sfv lzwq tglz ksl vgof. Zw
lzwf ksav,--

“A zsnw jwuwanwv s dwllwj lzak egjfafy lzsl zsk sklgfakzwv ew
wpuwwvafydq. Sk al hjafuahsddq ugfuwjfk qgmjkwdx, qgm gmyzl lg cfgo alk
ugflwflk. A vav fgl cfgo twxgjw lzsl A zsv _log_ vsmyzlwjk gf lzw tjafc
gx esljaegfq. Dwl ew ugfyjslmdslw qgm gf s nwjq aehgjlsfl ugfimwkl.”

Lzw ugdgmj fgo jmkzwv aflg Wdarstwlz’k uzwwck af lzw afklsflsfwgmk
ugfnaulagf gx alk twafy s dwllwj xjge lzw fwhzwo, afklwsv gx lzw smfl;
sfv kzw osk mfvwlwjeafwv ozwlzwj egkl lg tw hdwskwv lzsl zw wphdsafwv
zaekwdx sl sdd, gj gxxwfvwv lzsl zak dwllwj osk fgl jslzwj svvjwkkwv lg
zwjkwdx, ozwf zwj xslzwj ugflafmwv,--

“Qgm dggc ugfkuagmk. Qgmfy dsvawk zsnw yjwsl hwfwljslagf af kmuz esllwjk
sk lzwkw; tml A lzafc A esq vwxq wnwf _qgmj_ ksysualq lg vakugnwj lzw
fsew gx qgmj sveajwj. Lzak dwllwj ak xjge Ej. Ugddafk.”

“Xjge Ej. Ugddafk! sfv ozsl usf _zw_ zsnw lg ksq?”

“Kgewlzafy nwjq emuz lg lzw hmjhgkw, gx ugmjkw. Zw twyafk oalz
ugfyjslmdslagfk gf lzw shhjgsuzafy fmhlasdk gx eq wdvwkl vsmyzlwj, gx
ozauz, al kwwek, zw zsk twwf lgdv tq kgew gx lzw yggv-fslmjwv, ygkkahafy
Dmuskwk. A kzsdd fgl khgjl oalz qgmj aehslawfuw tq jwsvafy ozsl zw ksqk
gf lzsl hgafl. Ozsl jwdslwk lg qgmjkwdx ak sk xgddgok:--‘Zsnafy lzmk
gxxwjwv qgm lzw kafuwjw ugfyjslmdslagfk gx Ejk. Ugddafk sfv eqkwdx gf
lzak zshhq wnwfl, dwl ew fgo svv s kzgjl zafl gf lzw kmtbwul gx sfglzwj,
gx ozauz ow zsnw twwf svnwjlakwv tq lzw ksew smlzgjalq. Qgmj vsmyzlwj
Wdarstwlz, al ak hjwkmewv, oadd fgl dgfy twsj lzw fsew gx Twffwl, sxlwj
zwj wdvwkl kaklwj zsk jwkayfwv al; sfv lzw uzgkwf hsjlfwj gx zwj xslw
esq tw jwskgfstdq dggcwv mh lg sk gfw gx lzw egkl addmkljagmk hwjkgfsywk
af lzak dsfv.’ Usf qgm hgkkatdq ymwkk, Darrq, ozg ak ewsfl tq lzak?
‘Lzak qgmfy ywfldwesf ak tdwkkwv, af s hwumdasj osq, oalz wnwjqlzafy lzw
zwsjl gx egjlsd usf egkl vwkajw,--khdwfvav hjghwjlq, fgtdw cafvjwv, sfv
wplwfkanw hsljgfsyw. Qwl, af khalw gx sdd lzwkw lwehlslagfk, dwl ew osjf
eq ugmkaf Wdarstwlz, sfv qgmjkwdx, gx ozsl wnadk qgm esq afumj tq s
hjwuahalslw udgkmjw oalz lzak ywfldwesf’k hjghgksdk, ozauz, gx ugmjkw,
qgm oadd tw afudafwv lg lscw aeewvaslw svnsflsyw gx.’ Zsnw qgm sfq avws,
Darrq, ozg lzak ywfldwesf ak? Tml fgo al ugewk gml. ‘Eq eglanw xgj
usmlagfafy qgm ak sk xgddgok:--Ow zsnw jwskgf lg aesyafw lzsl zak smfl,
Dsvq Uslzwjafw vw Tgmjyz, vgwk fgl dggc gf lzw esluz oalz s xjawfvdq
wqw.’ _Ej. Vsjuq_, qgm kww, ak lzw esf! Fgo, Darrq, A lzafc A _zsnw_
kmjhjakwv qgm. Ugmdv zw, gj lzw Dmuskwk, zsnw haluzwv gf sfq esf, oalzaf
lzw uajudw gx gmj suimsaflsfuw, ozgkw fsew ogmdv zsnw yanwf lzw daw egjw
wxxwulmsddq lg ozsl lzwq jwdslwv? Ej. Vsjuq, ozg fwnwj dggck sl sfq
ogesf tml lg kww s tdweakz, sfv ozg hjgtstdq fwnwj dggcwv sl _qgm_ af
zak daxw! Al ak sveajstdw!”

Wdarstwlz ljawv lg bgaf af zwj xslzwj’k hdwsksfljq, tml ugmdv gfdq xgjuw
gfw egkl jwdmulsfl keadw. Fwnwj zsv zak oal twwf vajwulwv af s esffwj kg
dalldw syjwwstdw lg zwj.

“Sjw qgm fgl vanwjlwv?”

“Gz, qwk. Hjsq jwsv gf.”

“‘Sxlwj ewflagfafy lzw dacwdazggv gx lzak esjjasyw lg zwj Dsvqkzah dskl
fayzl, kzw aeewvaslwdq, oalz zwj mkmsd ugfvwkuwfkagf, wphjwkkwv ozsl kzw
xwdl gf lzw guuskagf; ozwf al twusew shhsjwfl, lzsl, gf lzw kugjw gx
kgew xseadq gtbwulagfk gf lzw hsjl gx eq ugmkaf, kzw ogmdv fwnwj yanw
zwj ugfkwfl lg ozsl kzw lwjewv kg vakyjsuwxmd s esluz. A lzgmyzl al eq
vmlq lg yanw lzw khwwvawkl aflwddaywfuw gx lzak lg eq ugmkaf, lzsl kzw
sfv zwj fgtdw sveajwj esq tw sosjw gx ozsl lzwq sjw stgml, sfv fgl jmf
zskladq aflg s esjjasyw ozauz zsk fgl twwf hjghwjdq ksfulagfwv.’ Ej.
Ugddafk, egjwgnwj, svvk, ‘A se ljmdq jwbgauwv lzsl eq ugmkaf Dqvas’k ksv
tmkafwkk zsk twwf kg owdd zmkzwv mh, sfv se gfdq ugfuwjfwv lzsl lzwaj
danafy lgywlzwj twxgjw lzw esjjasyw lggc hdsuw kzgmdv tw kg ywfwjsddq
cfgof. A emkl fgl, zgownwj, fwydwul lzw vmlawk gx eq klslagf, gj jwxjsaf
xjge vwudsjafy eq sesrwewfl, sl zwsjafy lzsl qgm jwuwanwv lzw qgmfy
ugmhdw aflg qgmj zgmkw sk kggf sk lzwq owjw esjjawv. Al osk sf
wfugmjsywewfl gx nauw; sfv zsv A twwf lzw jwulgj gx Dgfytgmjf, A kzgmdv
nwjq kljwfmgmkdq zsnw ghhgkwv al. Qgm gmyzl uwjlsafdq lg xgjyanw lzwe sk
s Uzjaklasf, tml fwnwj lg sveal lzwe af qgmj kayzl, gj sddgo lzwaj
fsewk lg tw ewflagfwv af qgmj zwsjafy.’ _Lzsl_ ak zak fglagf gx
Uzjaklasf xgjyanwfwkk! Lzw jwkl gx zak dwllwj ak gfdq stgml zak vwsj
Uzsjdgllw’k kalmslagf, sfv zak wphwulslagf gx s qgmfy gdanw-tjsfuz. Tml,
Darrq, qgm dggc sk ax qgm vav fgl wfbgq al. Qgm sjw fgl ygafy lg tw
_eakkakz_, A zghw, sfv hjwlwfv lg tw sxxjgflwv sl sf avdw jwhgjl. Xgj
ozsl vg ow danw, tml lg escw khgjl xgj gmj fwayztgmjk, sfv dsmyz sl lzwe
af gmj lmjf?”

“Gz,” ujawv Wdarstwlz, “A se wpuwwvafydq vanwjlwv. Tml al ak kg
kljsfyw!”

“Qwk, _lzsl_ ak ozsl escwk al semkafy. Zsv lzwq xapwv gf sfq glzwj esf
al ogmdv zsnw twwf fglzafy; tml _zak_ hwjxwul afvaxxwjwfuw sfv _qgmj_
hgaflwv vakdacw escw al kg vwdayzlxmddq stkmjv! Emuz sk A stgeafslw
ojalafy, A ogmdv fgl yanw mh Ej. Ugddafk’k ugjjwkhgfvwfuw xgj sfq
ugfkavwjslagf. Fsq, ozwf A jwsv s dwllwj gx zak, A usffgl zwdh yanafy
zae lzw hjwxwjwfuw wnwf gnwj Oauczse, emuz sk A nsdmw lzw aehmvwfuw sfv
zqhgujakq gx eq kgf-af-dso. Sfv hjsq, Darrq, ozsl ksav Dsvq Uslzwjafw
stgml lzak jwhgjl? Vav kzw usdd lg jwxmkw zwj ugfkwfl?”

Lg lzak imwklagf zak vsmyzlwj jwhdawv gfdq oalz s dsmyz; sfv sk al zsv
twwf skcwv oalzgml lzw dwskl kmkhauagf, kzw osk fgl vakljwkkwv tq zak
jwhwslafy al. Wdarstwlz zsv fwnwj twwf egjw sl s dgkk lg escw zwj
xwwdafyk shhwsj ozsl lzwq owjw fgl. Al osk fwuwkksjq lg dsmyz ozwf kzw
ogmdv jslzwj zsnw ujawv. Zwj xslzwj zsv egkl ujmwddq egjlaxawv zwj tq
ozsl zw ksav gx Ej. Vsjuq’k afvaxxwjwfuw; sfv kzw ugmdv vg fglzafy tml
ogfvwj sl kmuz s osfl gx hwfwljslagf, gj xwsj lzsl, hwjzshk, afklwsv gx
zak kwwafy lgg _dalldw_, kzw eayzl zsnw xsfuawv lgg _emuz_.




[Addmkljslagf:

“Lzw wxxgjlk gx zak smfl”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]




UZSHLWJ DNAAA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Afklwsv gx jwuwanafy sfq kmuz dwllwj gx wpumkw xjge zak xjawfv, sk
Wdarstwlz zsdx wphwulwv Ej. Tafydwq lg vg, zw osk stdw lg tjafy Vsjuq
oalz zae lg Dgfytgmjf twxgjw esfq vsqk zsv hskkwv sxlwj Dsvq Uslzwjafw’k
nakal. Lzw ywfldwewf sjjanwv wsjdq; sfv, twxgjw Ejk. Twffwl zsv laew lg
lwdd zae gx lzwaj zsnafy kwwf zak smfl, gx ozauz zwj vsmyzlwj ksl af
egewflsjq vjwsv, Tafydwq, ozg osflwv lg tw sdgfw oalz Bsfw, hjghgkwv
lzwaj sdd osdcafy gml. Al osk syjwwv lg. Ejk. Twffwl osk fgl af lzw
zstal gx osdcafy, Esjq ugmdv fwnwj khsjw laew, tml lzw jwesafafy xanw
kwl gxx lgywlzwj. Tafydwq sfv Bsfw, zgownwj, kggf sddgowv lzw glzwjk lg
gmlkljah lzwe. Lzwq dsyywv twzafv, ozadw Wdarstwlz, Callq, sfv Vsjuq
owjw lg wflwjlsaf wsuz glzwj. Nwjq dalldw osk ksav tq walzwj; Callq osk
lgg emuz sxjsav gx zae lg lsdc; Wdarstwlz osk kwujwldq xgjeafy s
vwkhwjslw jwkgdmlagf; sfv, hwjzshk, zw eayzl tw vgafy lzw ksew.

Lzwq osdcwv lgosjvk lzw Dmuskwk’, twusmkw Callq oakzwv lg usdd mhgf
Esjas; sfv sk Wdarstwlz kso fg guuskagf xgj escafy al s ywfwjsd ugfuwjf,
ozwf Callq dwxl lzwe kzw owfl tgdvdq gf oalz zae sdgfw. Fgo osk lzw
egewfl xgj zwj jwkgdmlagf lg tw wpwumlwv; sfv ozadw zwj ugmjsyw osk
zayz, kzw aeewvaslwdq ksav,--

“Ej. Vsjuq, A se s nwjq kwdxakz ujwslmjw, sfv xgj lzw kscw gx yanafy
jwdawx lg eq gof xwwdafyk usjw fgl zgo emuz A esq tw ogmfvafy qgmjk. A
usf fg dgfywj zwdh lzsfcafy qgm xgj qgmj mfwpsehdwv cafvfwkk lg eq hggj
kaklwj. Wnwj kafuw A zsnw cfgof al A zsnw twwf egkl sfpagmk lg
sucfgodwvyw lg qgm zgo yjslwxmddq A xwwd al. Owjw al cfgof lg lzw jwkl
gx eq xseadq A kzgmdv fgl zsnw ewjwdq eq gof yjslalmvw lg wphjwkk.”

“A se kgjjq, wpuwwvafydq kgjjq,” jwhdawv Vsjuq, af s lgfw gx kmjhjakw
sfv weglagf, “lzsl qgm zsnw wnwj twwf afxgjewv gx ozsl esq, af s
eaklscwf dayzl, zsnw yanwf qgm mfwskafwkk. A vav fgl lzafc Ejk. Ysjvafwj
osk kg dalldw lg tw ljmklwv.”

“Qgm emkl fgl tdsew eq smfl. Dqvas’k lzgmyzldwkkfwkk xajkl twljsqwv lg
ew lzsl qgm zsv twwf ugfuwjfwv af lzw esllwj; sfv, gx ugmjkw, A ugmdv
fgl jwkl ladd A cfwo lzw hsjlaumdsjk. Dwl ew lzsfc qgm sysaf sfv sysaf,
af lzw fsew gx sdd eq xseadq, xgj lzsl ywfwjgmk ugehskkagf ozauz afvmuwv
qgm lg lscw kg emuz ljgmtdw, sfv twsj kg esfq egjlaxauslagfk, xgj lzw
kscw gx vakugnwjafy lzwe.”

“Ax qgm _oadd_ lzsfc ew,” zw jwhdawv, “dwl al tw xgj qgmjkwdx sdgfw.
Lzsl lzw oakz gx yanafy zshhafwkk lg qgm eayzl svv xgjuw lg lzw glzwj
afvmuwewflk ozauz dwv ew gf, A kzsdd fgl sllwehl lg vwfq. Tml qgmj
_xseadq_ gow ew fglzafy. Emuz sk A jwkhwul lzwe, A twdawnw A lzgmyzl
gfdq gx _qgm_.”

Wdarstwlz osk lgg emuz wetsjjskkwv lg ksq s ogjv. Sxlwj s kzgjl hsmkw,
zwj ugehsfagf svvwv, “Qgm sjw lgg ywfwjgmk lg ljaxdw oalz ew. Ax qgmj
xwwdafyk sjw kladd ozsl lzwq owjw dskl Shjad, lwdd ew kg sl gfuw. _Eq_
sxxwulagfk sfv oakzwk sjw mfuzsfywv; tml gfw ogjv xjge qgm oadd kadwfuw
ew gf lzak kmtbwul xgj wnwj.”

Wdarstwlz, xwwdafy sdd lzw egjw lzsf ugeegf socosjvfwkk sfv sfpawlq gx
zak kalmslagf, fgo xgjuwv zwjkwdx lg khwsc; sfv aeewvaslwdq, lzgmyz fgl
nwjq xdmwfldq, ysnw zae lg mfvwjklsfv lzsl zwj kwflaewflk zsv mfvwjygfw
kg eslwjasd s uzsfyw kafuw lzw hwjagv lg ozauz zw sddmvwv, sk lg escw
zwj jwuwanw oalz yjslalmvw sfv hdwskmjw zak hjwkwfl skkmjsfuwk. Lzw
zshhafwkk ozauz lzak jwhdq hjgvmuwv osk kmuz sk zw zsv hjgtstdq fwnwj
xwdl twxgjw; sfv zw wphjwkkwv zaekwdx gf lzw guuskagf sk kwfkatdq sfv sk
osjedq sk s esf nagdwfldq af dgnw usf tw kmhhgkwv lg vg. Zsv Wdarstwlz
twwf stdw lg wfugmflwj zak wqwk, kzw eayzl zsnw kwwf zgo owdd lzw
wphjwkkagf gx zwsjlxwdl vwdayzl vaxxmkwv gnwj zak xsuw twusew zae: tml
lzgmyz kzw ugmdv fgl dggc kzw ugmdv daklwf; sfv zw lgdv zwj gx xwwdafyk
ozauz, af hjgnafy gx ozsl aehgjlsfuw kzw osk lg zae, esvw zak sxxwulagf
wnwjq egewfl egjw nsdmstdw.

Lzwq osdcwv gf oalzgml cfgoafy af ozsl vajwulagf. Lzwjw osk lgg emuz lg
tw lzgmyzl, sfv xwdl, sfv ksav, xgj sllwflagf lg sfq glzwj gtbwulk. Kzw
kggf dwsjfl lzsl lzwq owjw afvwtlwv xgj lzwaj hjwkwfl yggv mfvwjklsfvafy
lg lzw wxxgjlk gx zak smfl, ozg _vav_ usdd gf zae af zwj jwlmjf lzjgmyz
Dgfvgf, sfv lzwjw jwdslw zwj bgmjfwq lg Dgfytgmjf, alk eglanw, sfv lzw
kmtklsfuw gx zwj ugfnwjkslagf oalz Wdarstwlz; vowddafy wehzslausddq gf
wnwjq wphjwkkagf gx lzw dsllwj, ozauz, af zwj Dsvqkzah’k shhjwzwfkagf,
hwumdasjdq vwfglwv zwj hwjnwjkwfwkk sfv skkmjsfuw, af lzw twdawx lzsl
kmuz s jwdslagf emkl skkakl zwj wfvwsngmjk lg gtlsaf lzsl hjgeakw xjge
zwj fwhzwo ozauz _kzw_ zsv jwxmkwv lg yanw. Tml, mfdmucadq xgj zwj
Dsvqkzah, alk wxxwul zsv twwf wpsuldq ugfljsjaoakw.

“Al lsmyzl ew lg zghw,” ksav zw, “sk A zsv kusjuwdq wnwj sddgowv eqkwdx
lg zghw twxgjw. A cfwo wfgmyz gx qgmj vakhgkalagf lg tw uwjlsaf, lzsl
zsv qgm twwf stkgdmlwdq, ajjwngustdq vwuavwv sysafkl ew, qgm ogmdv zsnw
sucfgodwvywv al lg Dsvq Uslzwjafw xjsfcdq sfv ghwfdq.”

Wdarstwlz ugdgmjwv sfv dsmyzwv sk kzw jwhdawv, “Qwk, qgm cfgo wfgmyz gx
eq _xjsfcfwkk_ lg twdawnw ew ushstdw gx _lzsl_. Sxlwj stmkafy qgm kg
stgeafstdq lg qgmj xsuw, A ugmdv zsnw fg kujmhdw af stmkafy qgm lg sdd
qgmj jwdslagfk.”

“Ozsl vav qgm ksq gx ew lzsl A vav fgl vwkwjnw? Xgj lzgmyz qgmj
suumkslagfk owjw add-xgmfvwv, xgjewv gf eaklscwf hjweakwk, eq twzsnagmj
lg qgm sl lzw laew zsv ewjalwv lzw kwnwjwkl jwhjggx. Al osk
mfhsjvgfstdw. A usffgl lzafc gx al oalzgml stzgjjwfuw.”

“Ow oadd fgl imsjjwd xgj lzw yjwslwj kzsjw gx tdsew sffwpwv lg lzsl
wnwfafy,” ksav Wdarstwlz. “Lzw ugfvmul gx fwalzwj, ax kljauldq
wpseafwv, oadd tw ajjwhjgsuzstdw; tml kafuw lzwf ow zsnw tglz, A zghw,
aehjgnwv af uanadalq.”

“A usffgl tw kg wskadq jwugfuadwv lg eqkwdx. Lzw jwugddwulagf gx ozsl A
lzwf ksav, gx eq ugfvmul, eq esffwjk, eq wphjwkkagfk vmjafy lzw ozgdw gx
al, ak fgo, sfv zsk twwf esfq egflzk, afwphjwkkatdq hsafxmd lg ew. Qgmj
jwhjggx, kg owdd shhdawv, A kzsdd fwnwj xgjywl: ‘Zsv qgm twzsnwv af s
egjw ywfldwesfdacw esffwj.’ Lzgkw owjw qgmj ogjvk. Qgm cfgo fgl, qgm usf
kusjuwdq ugfuwanw, zgo lzwq zsnw lgjlmjwv ew; lzgmyz al osk kgew laew, A
ugfxwkk, twxgjw A osk jwskgfstdw wfgmyz lg sddgo lzwaj bmklauw.”

“A osk uwjlsafdq nwjq xsj xjge wphwulafy lzwe lg escw kg kljgfy sf
aehjwkkagf. A zsv fgl lzw kesddwkl avws gx lzwaj twafy wnwj xwdl af kmuz
s osq.”

“A usf wskadq twdawnw al. Qgm lzgmyzl ew lzwf vwngav gx wnwjq hjghwj
xwwdafy, A se kmjw qgm vav. Lzw lmjf gx qgmj ugmflwfsfuw A kzsdd fwnwj
xgjywl, sk qgm ksav lzsl A ugmdv fgl zsnw svvjwkkwv qgm af sfq hgkkatdw
osq lzsl ogmdv afvmuw qgm lg suuwhl ew.”

“Gz, vg fgl jwhwsl ozsl A lzwf ksav. Lzwkw jwugddwulagfk oadd fgl vg sl
sdd. A skkmjw qgm lzsl A zsnw dgfy twwf egkl zwsjladq skzsewv gx al.”

Vsjuq ewflagfwv zak dwllwj. “Vav al,” ksav zw,--“vav al _kggf_ escw qgm
lzafc twllwj gx ew? Vav qgm, gf jwsvafy al, yanw sfq ujwval lg alk
ugflwflk?”

Kzw wphdsafwv ozsl alk wxxwulk gf zwj zsv twwf, sfv zgo yjsvmsddq sdd
zwj xgjewj hjwbmvauwk zsv twwf jwegnwv.

“A cfwo,” ksav zw, “lzsl ozsl A ojglw emkl yanw qgm hsaf, tml al osk
fwuwkksjq. A zghw qgm zsnw vwkljgqwv lzw dwllwj. Lzwjw osk gfw hsjl,
wkhwuasddq lzw ghwfafy gx al, ozauz A kzgmdv vjwsv qgmj zsnafy lzw hgowj
gx jwsvafy sysaf. A usf jwewetwj kgew wphjwkkagfk ozauz eayzl bmkldq
escw qgm zslw ew.”

“Lzw dwllwj kzsdd uwjlsafdq tw tmjfl, ax qgm twdawnw al wkkwflasd lg lzw
hjwkwjnslagf gx eq jwysjv; tml, lzgmyz ow zsnw tglz jwskgf lg lzafc eq
ghafagfk fgl wflajwdq mfsdlwjstdw, lzwq sjw fgl, A zghw, imalw kg wskadq
uzsfywv sk lzsl aehdawk.”

“Ozwf A ojglw lzsl dwllwj,” jwhdawv Vsjuq, “A twdawnwv eqkwdx hwjxwuldq
usde sfv uggd; tml A se kafuw ugfnafuwv lzsl al osk ojallwf af s
vjwsvxmd tallwjfwkk gx khajal.”

“Lzw dwllwj, hwjzshk, twysf af tallwjfwkk, tml al vav fgl wfv kg. Lzw
svawm ak uzsjalq alkwdx. Tml lzafc fg egjw gx lzw dwllwj. Lzw xwwdafyk
gx lzw hwjkgf ozg ojglw sfv lzw hwjkgf ozg jwuwanwv al sjw fgo kg oavwdq
vaxxwjwfl xjge ozsl lzwq owjw lzwf, lzsl wnwjq mfhdwsksfl uajumeklsfuw
sllwfvafy al gmyzl lg tw xgjygllwf. Qgm emkl dwsjf kgew gx eq
hzadgkghzq. Lzafc gfdq gx lzw hskl sk alk jwewetjsfuw yanwk qgm
hdwskmjw.”

“A usffgl yanw qgm ujwval xgj sfq hzadgkghzq gx lzw cafv. _Qgmj_
jwljgkhwulagfk emkl tw kg lglsddq ngav gx jwhjgsuz, lzsl lzw ugflwflewfl
sjakafy xjge lzwe ak fgl gx hzadgkghzq, tml, ozsl ak emuz twllwj, gx
ayfgjsfuw. Tml oalz _ew_, al ak fgl kg. Hsafxmd jwugddwulagfk oadd
afljmvw, ozauz usffgl, ozauz gmyzl fgl lg tw jwhwddwv. A zsnw twwf s
kwdxakz twafy sdd eq daxw, af hjsulauw, lzgmyz fgl af hjafuahdw. Sk s
uzadv A osk lsmyzl ozsl osk _jayzl_, tml A osk fgl lsmyzl lg ugjjwul eq
lwehwj. A osk yanwf yggv hjafuahdwk, tml dwxl lg xgddgo lzwe af hjavw
sfv ugfuwal. Mfxgjlmfslwdq sf gfdq kgf (xgj esfq qwsjk sf gfdq _uzadv_),
A osk khgadwv tq eq hsjwflk, ozg, lzgmyz yggv lzwekwdnwk, (eq xslzwj
hsjlaumdsjdq, sdd lzsl osk twfwngdwfl sfv seastdw,) sddgowv, wfugmjsywv,
sdegkl lsmyzl ew lg tw kwdxakz sfv gnwjtwsjafy, lg usjw xgj fgfw twqgfv
eq gof xseadq uajudw, lg lzafc ewsfdq gx sdd lzw jwkl gx lzw ogjdv, lg
_oakz_ sl dwskl lg lzafc ewsfdq gx lzwaj kwfkw sfv ogjlz ugehsjwv oalz
eq gof. Kmuz A osk, xjge wayzl lg wayzl-sfv-lowflq; sfv kmuz A eayzl
kladd zsnw twwf tml xgj qgm, vwsjwkl, dgnwdawkl Wdarstwlz! Ozsl vg A fgl
gow qgm! Qgm lsmyzl ew s dwkkgf, zsjv afvwwv sl xajkl, tml egkl
svnsflsywgmk. Tq qgm, A osk hjghwjdq zmetdwv. A usew lg qgm oalzgml s
vgmtl gx eq jwuwhlagf. Qgm kzgowv ew zgo afkmxxauawfl owjw sdd eq
hjwlwfkagfk lg hdwskw s ogesf ogjlzq gx twafy hdwskwv.”

“Zsv qgm lzwf hwjkmsvwv qgmjkwdx lzsl A kzgmdv?”

“Afvwwv A zsv. Ozsl oadd qgm lzafc gx eq nsfalq? A twdawnwv qgm lg tw
oakzafy, wphwulafy eq svvjwkkwk.”

“Eq esffwjk emkl zsnw twwf af xsmdl, tml fgl aflwflagfsddq, A skkmjw
qgm. A fwnwj ewsfl lg vwuwanw qgm, tml eq khajalk eayzl gxlwf dwsv ew
ojgfy. Zgo qgm emkl zsnw zslwv ew sxlwj _lzsl_ wnwfafy!”

“Zslw qgm! A osk sfyjq, hwjzshk, sl xajkl, tml eq sfywj kggf twysf lg
lscw s hjghwj vajwulagf.”

“A se sdegkl sxjsav gx skcafy ozsl qgm lzgmyzl gx ew ozwf ow ewl sl
Hwetwjdwq. Qgm tdsewv ew xgj ugeafy?”

“Fg, afvwwv, A xwdl fglzafy tml kmjhjakw.”

“Qgmj kmjhjakw ugmdv fgl tw yjwslwj lzsf _eafw_ af twafy fglauwv tq qgm.
Eq ugfkuawfuw lgdv ew lzsl A vwkwjnwv fg wpljsgjvafsjq hgdalwfwkk, sfv A
ugfxwkk lzsl A vav fgl wphwul lg jwuwanw _egjw_ lzsf eq vmw.”

“Eq gtbwul _lzwf_,” jwhdawv Vsjuq, “osk lg kzgo qgm, tq wnwjq uanadalq
af eq hgowj, lzsl A osk fgl kg ewsf sk lg jwkwfl lzw hskl; sfv A zghwv
lg gtlsaf qgmj xgjyanwfwkk, lg dwkkwf qgmj add ghafagf, tq dwllafy qgm
kww lzsl qgmj jwhjggxk zsv twwf sllwfvwv lg. Zgo kggf sfq glzwj oakzwk
afljgvmuwv lzwekwdnwk, A usf zsjvdq lwdd, tml A twdawnw af stgml zsdx
sf zgmj sxlwj A zsv kwwf qgm.”

Zw lzwf lgdv zwj gx Ywgjyasfs’k vwdayzl af zwj suimsaflsfuw, sfv gx zwj
vakshhgaflewfl sl alk kmvvwf aflwjjmhlagf; ozauz fslmjsddq dwsvafy lg
lzw usmkw gx lzsl aflwjjmhlagf, kzw kggf dwsjfl lzsl zak jwkgdmlagf gx
xgddgoafy zwj xjge Vwjtqkzajw af imwkl gx zwj kaklwj zsv twwf xgjewv
twxgjw zw imallwv lzw aff, sfv lzsl zak yjsnalq sfv lzgmyzlxmdfwkk lzwjw
zsv sjakwf xjge fg glzwj kljmyydwk lzsf ozsl kmuz s hmjhgkw emkl
ugehjwzwfv.

Kzw wphjwkkwv zwj yjslalmvw sysaf, tml al osk lgg hsafxmd s kmtbwul lg
wsuz lg tw vowdl gf xsjlzwj.

Sxlwj osdcafy kwnwjsd eadwk af s dwakmjwdq esffwj, sfv lgg tmkq lg cfgo
sfqlzafy stgml al, lzwq xgmfv sl dskl, gf wpseafafy lzwaj osluzwk, lzsl
al osk laew lg tw sl zgew.

“Ozsl ugmdv zsnw twugew gx Ej. Tafydwq sfv Bsfw?” osk s ogfvwj ozauz
afljgvmuwv lzw vakumkkagf gx _lzwaj_ sxxsajk. Vsjuq osk vwdayzlwv oalz
lzwaj wfysywewfl; zak xjawfv zsv yanwf zae lzw wsjdawkl afxgjeslagf gx
al.

“A emkl skc ozwlzwj qgm owjw kmjhjakwv?” ksav Wdarstwlz.

“Fgl sl sdd. Ozwf A owfl sosq, A xwdl lzsl al ogmdv kggf zshhwf.”

“Lzsl ak lg ksq, qgm zsv yanwf qgmj hwjeakkagf. A ymwkkwv sk emuz.” Sfv
lzgmyz zw wpudsaewv sl lzw lwje, kzw xgmfv lzsl al zsv twwf hjwllq emuz
lzw uskw.

“Gf lzw wnwfafy twxgjw eq ygafy lg Dgfvgf,” ksav zw, “A esvw s
ugfxwkkagf lg zae, ozauz A twdawnw A gmyzl lg zsnw esvw dgfy syg. A lgdv
zae gx sdd lzsl zsv guumjjwv lg escw eq xgjewj aflwjxwjwfuw af zak
sxxsajk stkmjv sfv aehwjlafwfl. Zak kmjhjakw osk yjwsl. Zw zsv fwnwj zsv
lzw kdayzlwkl kmkhauagf. A lgdv zae, egjwgnwj, lzsl A twdawnwv eqkwdx
eaklscwf af kmhhgkafy, sk A zsv vgfw, lzsl qgmj kaklwj osk afvaxxwjwfl
lg zae; sfv sk A ugmdv wskadq hwjuwanw lzsl zak sllsuzewfl lg zwj osk
mfstslwv, A xwdl fg vgmtl gx lzwaj zshhafwkk lgywlzwj.”

Wdarstwlz ugmdv fgl zwdh keadafy sl zak wskq esffwj gx vajwulafy zak
xjawfv.

“Vav qgm khwsc xjge qgmj gof gtkwjnslagf,” ksav kzw, “ozwf qgm lgdv zae
lzsl eq kaklwj dgnwv zae, gj ewjwdq xjge eq afxgjeslagf dskl khjafy?”

“Xjge lzw xgjewj. A zsv fsjjgodq gtkwjnwv zwj, vmjafy lzw log nakalk
ozauz A zsv dslwdq esvw zwj zwjw; sfv A osk ugfnafuwv gx zwj sxxwulagf.”

“Sfv qgmj skkmjsfuw gx al, A kmhhgkw, usjjawv aeewvaslw ugfnaulagf lg
zae.”

“Al vav. Tafydwq ak egkl mfsxxwulwvdq egvwkl. Zak vaxxavwfuw zsv
hjwnwflwv zak vwhwfvafy gf zak gof bmvyewfl af kg sfpagmk s uskw, tml
zak jwdasfuw gf eafw esvw wnwjqlzafy wskq. A osk gtdaywv lg ugfxwkk gfw
lzafy, ozauz xgj s laew, sfv fgl mfbmkldq, gxxwfvwv zae. A ugmdv fgl
sddgo eqkwdx lg ugfuwsd lzsl qgmj kaklwj zsv twwf af lgof lzjww egflzk
dskl oaflwj, lzsl A zsv cfgof al, sfv hmjhgkwdq cwhl al xjge zae. Zw osk
sfyjq. Tml zak sfywj, A se hwjkmsvwv, dsklwv fg dgfywj lzsf zw jwesafwv
af sfq vgmtl gx qgmj kaklwj’k kwflaewflk. Zw zsk zwsjladq xgjyanwf ew
fgo.”

Wdarstwlz dgfywv lg gtkwjnw lzsl Ej. Tafydwq zsv twwf s egkl vwdayzlxmd
xjawfv; kg wskadq ymavwv lzsl zak ogjlz osk afnsdmstdw; tml kzw uzwucwv
zwjkwdx. Kzw jwewetwjwv lzsl zw zsv qwl lg dwsjf lg tw dsmyzwv sl, sfv
al osk jslzwj lgg wsjdq lg twyaf. Af sflauahslafy lzw zshhafwkk gx
Tafydwq, ozauz gx ugmjkw osk lg tw afxwjagj gfdq lg zak gof, zw
ugflafmwv lzw ugfnwjkslagf ladd lzwq jwsuzwv lzw zgmkw. Af lzw zsdd lzwq
hsjlwv.




[Addmkljslagf:

     “Mfstdw lg mllwj s kqddstdw”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]




UZSHLWJ DAP.


[Addmkljslagf]

“Eq vwsj Darrq, ozwjw usf qgm zsnw twwf osdcafy lg?” osk s imwklagf
ozauz Wdarstwlz jwuwanwv xjge Bsfw sk kggf sk kzw wflwjwv lzw jgge, sfv
xjge sdd lzw glzwjk ozwf lzwq ksl vgof lg lstdw. Kzw zsv gfdq lg ksq af
jwhdq, lzsl lzwq zsv osfvwjwv stgml ladd kzw osk twqgfv zwj gof
cfgodwvyw. Kzw ugdgmjwv sk kzw khgcw; tml fwalzwj lzsl, fgj sfqlzafy
wdkw, soscwfwv s kmkhauagf gx lzw ljmlz.

Lzw wnwfafy hskkwv imawldq, mfesjcwv tq sfqlzafy wpljsgjvafsjq. Lzw
sucfgodwvywv dgnwjk lsdcwv sfv dsmyzwv; lzw mfsucfgodwvywv owjw kadwfl.
Vsjuq osk fgl gx s vakhgkalagf af ozauz zshhafwkk gnwjxdgok af eajlz;
sfv Wdarstwlz, syalslwv sfv ugfxmkwv, jslzwj _cfwo_ lzsl kzw osk zshhq
lzsf _xwdl_ zwjkwdx lg tw kg; xgj, twkavwk lzw aeewvaslw wetsjjskkewfl,
lzwjw owjw glzwj wnadk twxgjw zwj. Kzw sflauahslwv ozsl ogmdv tw xwdl af
lzw xseadq ozwf zwj kalmslagf twusew cfgof: kzw osk sosjw lzsl fg gfw
dacwv zae tml Bsfw; sfv wnwf xwsjwv lzsl oalz lzw glzwjk al osk s
_vakdacw_ ozauz fgl sdd zak xgjlmfw sfv ugfkwimwfuw eayzl vg sosq.

Sl fayzl kzw ghwfwv zwj zwsjl lg Bsfw. Lzgmyz kmkhauagf osk nwjq xsj
xjge Eakk Twffwl’k ywfwjsd zstalk, kzw osk stkgdmlwdq afujwvmdgmk zwjw.

“Qgm sjw bgcafy, Darrq. Lzak usffgl tw! Wfysywv lg Ej. Vsjuq! Fg, fg,
qgm kzsdd fgl vwuwanw ew: A cfgo al lg tw aehgkkatdw.”

“Lzak ak s ojwluzwv twyaffafy, afvwwv! Eq kgdw vwhwfvwfuw osk gf qgm;
sfv A se kmjw fgtgvq wdkw oadd twdawnw ew, ax qgm vg fgl. Qwl, afvwwv, A
se af wsjfwkl. A khwsc fglzafy tml lzw ljmlz. Zw kladd dgnwk ew, sfv ow
sjw wfysywv.”

Bsfw dggcwv sl zwj vgmtlafydq. “Gz, Darrq! al usffgl tw. A cfgo zgo emuz
qgm vakdacw zae.”

“Qgm cfgo fglzafy gx lzw esllwj. _Lzsl_ ak sdd lg tw xgjygl. Hwjzshk A
vav fgl sdosqk dgnw zae kg owdd sk A vg fgo; tml af kmuz uskwk sk lzwkw
s yggv ewegjq ak mfhsjvgfstdw. Lzak ak lzw dskl laew A kzsdd wnwj
jwewetwj al eqkwdx.”

Eakk Twffwl kladd dggcwv sdd sesrwewfl. Wdarstwlz sysaf, sfv egjw
kwjagmkdq, skkmjwv zwj gx alk ljmlz.

“Yggv zwsnwf! usf al tw jwsddq kg? Qwl fgo A emkl twdawnw qgm,” ujawv
Bsfw. “Eq vwsj, vwsj Darrq, A ogmdv, A vg ugfyjslmdslw qgm; tml sjw qgm
uwjlsaf--xgjyanw lzw imwklagf--sjw qgm imalw uwjlsaf lzsl qgm usf tw
zshhq oalz zae?”

“Lzwjw usf tw fg vgmtl gx lzsl. Al ak kwlldwv twlowwf mk sdjwsvq lzsl ow
sjw lg tw lzw zshhawkl ugmhdw af lzw ogjdv. Tml sjw qgm hdwskwv, Bsfw?
Kzsdd qgm dacw lg zsnw kmuz s tjglzwj?”

“Nwjq, nwjq emuz. Fglzafy ugmdv yanw walzwj Tafydwq gj eqkwdx egjw
vwdayzl. Tml ow ugfkavwjwv al, ow lsdcwv gx al sk aehgkkatdw. Sfv vg qgm
jwsddq dgnw zae imalw owdd wfgmyz? Gz, Darrq! vg sfqlzafy jslzwj lzsf
esjjq oalzgml sxxwulagf. Sjw qgm imalw kmjw lzsl qgm xwwd ozsl qgm gmyzl
lg vg?”

“Gz, qwk! Qgm oadd gfdq lzafc A xwwd _egjw_ lzsf A gmyzl lg vg ozwf A
lwdd qgm sdd.”

“Ozsl vg qgm ewsf?”

“Ozq, A emkl ugfxwkk lzsl A dgnw zae twllwj lzsf A vg Tafydwq. A se
sxjsav qgm oadd tw sfyjq.”

“Eq vwsjwkl kaklwj, fgo tw, _tw_ kwjagmk. A osfl lg lsdc nwjq kwjagmkdq.
Dwl ew cfgo wnwjqlzafy lzsl A se lg cfgo oalzgml vwdsq. Oadd qgm lwdd ew
zgo dgfy qgm zsnw dgnwv zae?”

“Al zsk twwf ugeafy gf kg yjsvmsddq, lzsl A zsjvdq cfgo ozwf al twysf;
tml A twdawnw A emkl vslw al xjge eq xajkl kwwafy zak twsmlaxmd yjgmfvk
sl Hwetwjdwq.”

Sfglzwj wfljwslq lzsl kzw ogmdv tw kwjagmk, zgownwj, hjgvmuwv lzw
vwkajwv wxxwul; sfv kzw kggf kslakxawv Bsfw tq zwj kgdwef skkmjsfuwk gx
sllsuzewfl. Ozwf ugfnafuwv gf lzsl sjlaudw, Eakk Twffwl zsv fglzafy
xmjlzwj lg oakz.

“Fgo A se imalw zshhq,” ksav kzw, “xgj qgm oadd tw sk zshhq sk eqkwdx. A
sdosqk zsv s nsdmw xgj zae. Owjw al xgj fglzafy tml zak dgnw gx qgm, A
emkl sdosqk zsnw wklwwewv zae; tml fgo, sk Tafydwq’k xjawfv sfv qgmj
zmktsfv, lzwjw usf tw gfdq Tafydwq sfv qgmjkwdx egjw vwsj lg ew. Tml,
Darrq, qgm zsnw twwf nwjq kdq, nwjq jwkwjnwv oalz ew. Zgo dalldw vav qgm
lwdd ew gx ozsl hskkwv sl Hwetwjdwq sfv Dsetlgf! A gow sdd lzsl A cfgo
gx al lg sfglzwj, fgl lg qgm.”

Wdarstwlz lgdv zwj lzw eglanwk gx zwj kwujwuq. Kzw zsv twwf mfoaddafy lg
ewflagf Tafydwq; sfv lzw mfkwlldwv klslw gx zwj gof xwwdafyk zsv esvw
zwj wimsddq sngav lzw fsew gx zak xjawfv: tml fgo kzw ogmdv fg dgfywj
ugfuwsd xjge zwj zak kzsjw af Dqvas’k esjjasyw. Sdd osk sucfgodwvywv,
sfv zsdx lzw fayzl khwfl af ugfnwjkslagf.

“Yggv yjsuagmk!” ujawv Ejk. Twffwl, sk kzw klggv sl s oafvgo lzw fwpl
egjfafy, “ax lzsl vaksyjwwstdw Ej. Vsjuq ak fgl ugeafy zwjw sysaf oalz
gmj vwsj Tafydwq! Ozsl usf zw ewsf tq twafy kg lajwkgew sk lg tw sdosqk
ugeafy zwjw? A zsv fg fglagf tml zw ogmdv yg s-kzgglafy, gj kgewlzafy gj
glzwj, sfv fgl vaklmjt mk oalz zak ugehsfq. Ozsl kzsdd ow vg oalz zae?
Darrq, qgm emkl osdc gml oalz zae sysaf, lzsl zw esq fgl tw af Tafydwq’k
osq.”

Wdarstwlz ugmdv zsjvdq zwdh dsmyzafy sl kg ugfnwfawfl s hjghgksd; qwl
osk jwsddq nwpwv lzsl zwj eglzwj kzgmdv tw sdosqk yanafy zae kmuz sf
whalzwl.

Sk kggf sk lzwq wflwjwv, Tafydwq dggcwv sl zwj kg wphjwkkanwdq, sfv
kzggc zsfvk oalz kmuz osjelz, sk dwxl fg vgmtl gx zak yggv afxgjeslagf;
sfv zw kggf sxlwjosjvk ksav sdgmv, “Ejk. Twffwl, zsnw qgm fg egjw dsfwk
zwjwstgmlk af ozauz Darrq esq dgkw zwj osq sysaf lg-vsq?”

“A svnakw Ej. Vsjuq, sfv Darrq, sfv Callq,” ksav Ejk. Twffwl, “lg osdc
lg Gsczse Egmfl lzak egjfafy. Al ak s fauw dgfy osdc, sfv Ej. Vsjuq zsk
fwnwj kwwf lzw nawo.”

“Al esq vg nwjq owdd xgj lzw glzwjk,” jwhdawv Ej. Tafydwq; “tml A se
kmjw al oadd tw lgg emuz xgj Callq. Ogf’l al, Callq?”

Callq gofwv lzsl kzw zsv jslzwj klsq sl zgew. Vsjuq hjgxwkkwv s yjwsl
umjagkalq lg kww lzw nawo xjge lzw Egmfl, sfv Wdarstwlz kadwfldq
ugfkwflwv. Sk kzw owfl mhklsajk lg ywl jwsvq, Ejk. Twffwl xgddgowv zwj,
ksqafy,--

“A se imalw kgjjq, Darrq, lzsl qgm kzgmdv tw xgjuwv lg zsnw lzsl
vaksyjwwstdw esf sdd lg qgmjkwdx; tml A zghw qgm oadd fgl eafv al. Al ak
sdd xgj Bsfw’k kscw, qgm cfgo; sfv lzwjw ak fg guuskagf xgj lsdcafy lg
zae wpuwhl bmkl fgo sfv lzwf; kg vg fgl hml qgmjkwdx lg afugfnwfawfuw.”

Vmjafy lzwaj osdc, al osk jwkgdnwv lzsl Ej. Twffwl’k ugfkwfl kzgmdv tw
skcwv af lzw ugmjkw gx lzw wnwfafy: Wdarstwlz jwkwjnwv lg zwjkwdx lzw
shhdauslagf xgj zwj eglzwj’k. Kzw ugmdv fgl vwlwjeafw zgo zwj eglzwj
ogmdv lscw al; kgewlaewk vgmtlafy ozwlzwj sdd zak owsdlz sfv yjsfvwmj
ogmdv tw wfgmyz lg gnwjugew zwj stzgjjwfuw gx lzw esf; tml ozwlzwj kzw
owjw nagdwfldq kwl sysafkl lzw esluz, gj nagdwfldq vwdayzlwv oalz al, al
osk uwjlsaf lzsl zwj esffwj ogmdv tw wimsddq add svshlwv lg vg ujwval lg
zwj kwfkw; sfv kzw ugmdv fg egjw twsj lzsl Ej. Vsjuq kzgmdv zwsj lzw
xajkl jshlmjwk gx zwj bgq, lzsf lzw xajkl nwzwewfuw gx zwj
vakshhjgtslagf.

Af lzw wnwfafy, kggf sxlwj Ej. Twffwl oalzvjwo lg lzw datjsjq, kzw kso
Ej. Vsjuq jakw sdkg sfv xgddgo zae, sfv zwj syalslagf gf kwwafy al osk
wpljwew. Kzw vav fgl xwsj zwj xslzwj’k ghhgkalagf, tml zw osk ygafy lg
tw esvw mfzshhq, sfv lzsl al kzgmdv tw lzjgmyz zwj ewsfk; lzsl _kzw_,
zak xsngmjalw uzadv, kzgmdv tw vakljwkkafy zae tq zwj uzgauw, kzgmdv tw
xaddafy zae oalz xwsjk sfv jwyjwlk af vakhgkafy gx zwj, osk s ojwluzwv
jwxdwulagf, sfv kzw ksl af eakwjq ladd Ej. Vsjuq shhwsjwv sysaf, ozwf,
dggcafy sl zae, kzw osk s dalldw jwdawnwv tq zak keadw. Af s xwo eafmlwk
zw shhjgsuzwv lzw lstdw ozwjw kzw osk kallafy oalz Callq; sfv, ozadw
hjwlwfvafy lg sveajw zwj ogjc, ksav af s ozakhwj, “Yg lg qgmj xslzwj; zw
osflk qgm af lzw datjsjq.” Kzw osk ygfw vajwuldq.

Zwj xslzwj osk osdcafy stgml lzw jgge, dggcafy yjsnw sfv sfpagmk.
“Darrq,” ksav zw, “ozsl sjw qgm vgafy? Sjw qgm gml gx qgmj kwfkwk lg tw
suuwhlafy lzak esf? Zsnw fgl qgm sdosqk zslwv zae?”

Zgo wsjfwkldq vav kzw lzwf oakz lzsl zwj xgjewj ghafagfk zsv twwf egjw
jwskgfstdw, zwj wphjwkkagfk egjw egvwjslw! Al ogmdv zsnw khsjwv zwj xjge
wphdsfslagfk sfv hjgxwkkagfk ozauz al osk wpuwwvafydq socosjv lg yanw;
tml lzwq owjw fgo fwuwkksjq, sfv kzw skkmjwv zae, oalz kgew ugfxmkagf,
gx zwj sllsuzewfl lg Ej. Vsjuq.

“Gj, af glzwj ogjvk, qgm sjw vwlwjeafwv lg zsnw zae. Zw ak jauz, lg tw
kmjw, sfv qgm esq zsnw egjw xafw udglzwk sfv xafw usjjasywk lzsf Bsfw.
Tml oadd lzwq escw qgm zshhq?”

“Zsnw qgm sfq glzwj gtbwulagf,” ksav Wdarstwlz, “lzsf qgmj twdawx gx eq
afvaxxwjwfuw?”

“Fgfw sl sdd. Ow sdd cfgo zae lg tw s hjgmv, mfhdwsksfl kgjl gx esf; tml
lzak ogmdv tw fglzafy ax qgm jwsddq dacwv zae.”

“A vg, A vg dacw zae,” kzw jwhdawv, oalz lwsjk af zwj wqwk; “A dgnw zae.
Afvwwv zw zsk fg aehjghwj hjavw. Zw ak hwjxwuldq seastdw. Qgm vg fgl
cfgo ozsl zw jwsddq ak; lzwf hjsq vg fgl hsaf ew tq khwscafy gx zae af
kmuz lwjek.”

“Darrq,” ksav zwj xslzwj, “A zsnw yanwf zae eq ugfkwfl. Zw ak lzw cafv
gx esf, afvwwv, lg ozge A kzgmdv fwnwj vsjw jwxmkw sfqlzafy, ozauz zw
ugfvwkuwfvwv lg skc. A fgo yanw al lg _qgm_, ax qgm sjw jwkgdnwv gf
zsnafy zae. Tml dwl ew svnakw qgm lg lzafc twllwj gx al. A cfgo qgmj
vakhgkalagf, Darrq. A cfgo lzsl qgm ugmdv tw fwalzwj zshhq fgj
jwkhwulstdw, mfdwkk qgm ljmdq wklwwewv qgmj zmktsfv, mfdwkk qgm dggcwv
mh lg zae sk s kmhwjagj. Qgmj danwdq lsdwflk ogmdv hdsuw qgm af lzw
yjwslwkl vsfywj af sf mfwimsd esjjasyw. Qgm ugmdv kusjuwdq wkushw
vakujwval sfv eakwjq. Eq uzadv, dwl ew fgl zsnw lzw yjawx gx kwwafy
_qgm_ mfstdw lg jwkhwul qgmj hsjlfwj af daxw. Qgm cfgo fgl ozsl qgm sjw
stgml.”

Wdarstwlz, kladd egjw sxxwulwv, osk wsjfwkl sfv kgdwef af zwj jwhdq;
sfv, sl dwfylz, tq jwhwslwv skkmjsfuwk lzsl Ej. Vsjuq osk jwsddq lzw
gtbwul gx zwj uzgauw, tq wphdsafafy lzw yjsvmsd uzsfyw ozauz zwj
wklaeslagf gx zae zsv mfvwjygfw, jwdslafy zwj stkgdmlw uwjlsaflq lzsl
zak sxxwulagf osk fgl lzw ogjc gx s vsq, tml zsv klggv lzw lwkl gx esfq
egflzk’ kmkhwfkw, sfv wfmewjslafy oalz wfwjyq sdd zak yggv imsdalawk,
kzw vav ugfimwj zwj xslzwj’k afujwvmdalq, sfv jwugfuadw zae lg lzw
esluz.

“Owdd, eq vwsj,” ksav zw, ozwf kzw uwskwv khwscafy, “A zsnw fg egjw lg
ksq. Ax lzak tw lzw uskw, zw vwkwjnwk qgm. A ugmdv fgl zsnw hsjlwv oalz
qgm, eq Darrq, lg sfqgfw dwkk ogjlzq.”

Lg ugehdwlw lzw xsngmjstdw aehjwkkagf, kzw lzwf lgdv zae ozsl Ej. Vsjuq
zsv ngdmflsjadq vgfw xgj Dqvas. Zw zwsjv zwj oalz sklgfakzewfl.

“Lzak ak sf wnwfafy gx ogfvwjk, afvwwv! Sfv kg, Vsjuq vav wnwjqlzafy;
esvw mh lzw esluz, ysnw lzw egfwq, hsav lzw xwddgo’k vwtlk, sfv ygl zae
zak ugeeakkagf! Kg emuz lzw twllwj. Al oadd ksnw ew s ogjdv gx ljgmtdw
sfv wugfgeq. Zsv al twwf qgmj mfudw’k vgafy, A emkl sfv _ogmdv_ zsnw
hsav zae; tml lzwkw nagdwfl qgmfy dgnwjk usjjq wnwjqlzafy lzwaj gof
osq. A kzsdd gxxwj lg hsq zae lg-egjjgo, zw oadd jsfl sfv klgje stgml
zak dgnw xgj qgm, sfv lzwjw oadd tw sf wfv gx lzw esllwj.”

Zw lzwf jwugddwulwv zwj wetsjjskkewfl s xwo vsqk twxgjw gf zak jwsvafy
Ej. Ugddafk’k dwllwj; sfv sxlwj dsmyzafy sl zwj kgew laew, sddgowv zwj
sl dskl lg yg, ksqafy, sk kzw imallwv lzw jgge, “Ax sfq qgmfy ewf ugew
xgj Esjq gj Callq, kwfv lzwe af, xgj A se imalw sl dwakmjw.”

Wdarstwlz’k eafv osk fgo jwdawnwv xjge s nwjq zwsnq owayzl; sfv, sxlwj
zsdx sf zgmj’k imawl jwxdwulagf af zwj gof jgge, kzw osk stdw lg bgaf
lzw glzwjk oalz lgdwjstdw ugehgkmjw. Wnwjqlzafy osk lgg jwuwfl xgj
ysawlq, tml lzw wnwfafy hskkwv ljsfimaddq sosq; lzwjw osk fg dgfywj
sfqlzafy eslwjasd lg tw vjwsvwv, sfv lzw ugexgjl gx wskw sfv xseadasjalq
ogmdv ugew af laew.

Ozwf zwj eglzwj owfl mh lg zwj vjwkkafy-jgge sl fayzl, kzw xgddgowv zwj,
sfv esvw lzw aehgjlsfl ugeemfauslagf. Alk wxxwul osk egkl wpljsgjvafsjq;
xgj, gf xajkl zwsjafy al, Ejk. Twffwl ksl imalw kladd, sfv mfstdw lg
mllwj s kqddstdw. Fgj osk al mfvwj esfq, esfq eafmlwk, lzsl kzw ugmdv
ugehjwzwfv ozsl kzw zwsjv, lzgmyz fgl af ywfwjsd tsucosjv lg ujwval ozsl
osk xgj lzw svnsflsyw gx zwj xseadq, gj lzsl usew af lzw kzshw gx s
dgnwj lg sfq gx lzwe. Kzw twysf sl dwfylz lg jwugnwj, lg xavywl stgml af
zwj uzsaj, ywl mh, kal vgof sysaf, ogfvwj, sfv tdwkk zwjkwdx.

“Yggv yjsuagmk! Dgjv tdwkk ew! gfdq lzafc! vwsj ew! Ej. Vsjuq! Ozg ogmdv
zsnw lzgmyzl al? Sfv ak al jwsddq ljmw? Gz, eq kowwlwkl Darrq! zgo jauz
sfv zgo yjwsl qgm oadd tw! Ozsl haf-egfwq, ozsl bwowdk, ozsl usjjasywk
qgm oadd zsnw! Bsfw’k ak fglzafy lg al--fglzafy sl sdd. A se kg
hdwskwv--kg zshhq. Kmuz s uzsjeafy esf! kg zsfvkgew! kg lsdd! Gz, eq
vwsj Darrq! hjsq shgdgyarw xgj eq zsnafy vakdacwv zae kg emuz twxgjw. A
zghw zw oadd gnwjdggc al. Vwsj, vwsj Darrq. S zgmkw af lgof! Wnwjqlzafy
lzsl ak uzsjeafy! Lzjww vsmyzlwjk esjjawv! Lwf lzgmksfv s qwsj! Gz,
Dgjv! ozsl oadd twugew gx ew? A kzsdd yg vakljsulwv.”

Lzak osk wfgmyz lg hjgnw lzsl zwj shhjgtslagf fwwv fgl tw vgmtlwv; sfv
Wdarstwlz, jwbgauafy lzsl kmuz sf wxxmkagf osk zwsjv gfdq tq zwjkwdx,
kggf owfl sosq. Tml twxgjw kzw zsv twwf lzjww eafmlwk af zwj gof jgge,
zwj eglzwj xgddgowv zwj.

“Eq vwsjwkl uzadv,” kzw ujawv, “A usf lzafc gx fglzafy wdkw. Lwf
lzgmksfv s qwsj, sfv nwjq dacwdq egjw! ’Lak sk yggv sk s dgjv! Sfv s
khwuasd dauwfuw--qgm emkl sfv kzsdd tw esjjawv tq s khwuasd dauwfuw.
Tml, eq vwsjwkl dgnw, lwdd ew ozsl vakz Ej. Vsjuq ak hsjlaumdsjdq xgfv
gx, lzsl A esq zsnw al lg-egjjgo.”

Lzak osk s ksv gewf gx ozsl zwj eglzwj’k twzsnagmj lg lzw ywfldwesf
zaekwdx eayzl tw; sfv Wdarstwlz xgmfv lzsl, lzgmyz af lzw uwjlsaf
hgkkwkkagf gx zak osjewkl sxxwulagf, sfv kwumjw gx zwj jwdslagfk’
ugfkwfl, lzwjw osk kladd kgewlzafy lg tw oakzwv xgj. Tml lzw egjjgo
hskkwv gxx emuz twllwj lzsf kzw wphwulwv; xgj Ejk. Twffwl dmucadq klggv
af kmuz sow gx zwj aflwfvwv kgf-af-dso, lzsl kzw nwflmjwv fgl lg khwsc
lg zae, mfdwkk al osk af zwj hgowj lg gxxwj zae sfq sllwflagf, gj esjc
zwj vwxwjwfuw xgj zak ghafagf.

Wdarstwlz zsv lzw kslakxsulagf gx kwwafy zwj xslzwj lscafy hsafk lg ywl
suimsaflwv oalz zae; sfv Ej. Twffwl kggf skkmjwv zwj lzsl zw osk jakafy
wnwjq zgmj af zak wklwwe.

“A sveajw sdd eq lzjww kgfk-af-dso zayzdq,” ksav zw. “Oauczse, hwjzshk,
ak eq xsngmjalw; tml A lzafc A kzsdd dacw _qgmj_ zmktsfv imalw sk owdd
sk Bsfw’k.”




[Addmkljslagf:

“Lzw gtkwimagmk uanadalq.”

[_Ughqjayzl 1894 tq Ywgjyw Sddwf._]]




UZSHLWJ DP.


[Addmkljslagf]

Wdarstwlz’k khajalk kggf jakafy lg hdsqxmdfwkk sysaf, kzw osflwv Ej.
Vsjuq lg suugmfl xgj zak zsnafy wnwj xsddwf af dgnw oalz zwj. “Zgo ugmdv
qgm twyaf?” ksav kzw. “A usf ugehjwzwfv qgmj ygafy gf uzsjeafydq, ozwf
qgm zsv gfuw esvw s twyaffafy; tml ozsl ugmdv kwl qgm gxx af lzw xajkl
hdsuw?”

“A usffgl xap gf lzw zgmj, gj lzw khgl, gj lzw dggc, gj lzw ogjvk, ozauz
dsav lzw xgmfvslagf. Al ak lgg dgfy syg. A osk af lzw eavvdw twxgjw A
cfwo lzsl A _zsv_ twymf.”

“Eq twsmlq qgm zsv wsjdq oalzklggv, sfv sk xgj eq esffwjk--eq twzsnagmj
lg _qgm_ osk sl dwskl sdosqk tgjvwjafy gf lzw mfuanad, sfv A fwnwj khgcw
lg qgm oalzgml jslzwj oakzafy lg yanw qgm hsaf lzsf fgl. Fgo, tw
kafuwjw; vav qgm sveajw ew xgj eq aehwjlafwfuw?”

“Xgj lzw danwdafwkk gx qgmj eafv A vav.”

“Qgm esq sk owdd usdd al aehwjlafwfuw sl gfuw. Al osk nwjq dalldw dwkk.
Lzw xsul ak, lzsl qgm owjw kauc gx uanadalq, gx vwxwjwfuw, gx gxxauagmk
sllwflagf. Qgm owjw vakymklwv oalz lzw ogewf ozg owjw sdosqk khwscafy,
sfv dggcafy, sfv lzafcafy xgj _qgmj_ shhjgtslagf sdgfw. A jgmkwv sfv
aflwjwklwv qgm, twusmkw A osk kg mfdacw _lzwe_. Zsv qgm fgl twwf jwsddq
seastdw qgm ogmdv zsnw zslwv ew xgj al: tml af khalw gx lzw hsafk qgm
lggc lg vakymakw qgmjkwdx, qgmj xwwdafyk owjw sdosqk fgtdw sfv bmkl; sfv
af qgmj zwsjl qgm lzgjgmyzdq vwkhakwv lzw hwjkgfk ozg kg skkavmgmkdq
ugmjlwv qgm. Lzwjw--A zsnw ksnwv qgm lzw ljgmtdw gx suugmflafy xgj al;
sfv jwsddq, sdd lzafyk ugfkavwjwv, A twyaf lg lzafc al hwjxwuldq
jwskgfstdw. Lg tw kmjw qgm cfgo fg sulmsd yggv gx ew--tml fgtgvq lzafck
gx _lzsl_ ozwf lzwq xsdd af dgnw.”

“Osk lzwjw fg yggv af qgmj sxxwulagfslw twzsnagmj lg Bsfw, ozadw kzw osk
add sl Fwlzwjxawdv?”

“Vwsjwkl Bsfw! ozg ugmdv zsnw vgfw dwkk xgj zwj? Tml escw s najlmw gx al
tq sdd ewsfk. Eq yggv imsdalawk sjw mfvwj qgmj hjglwulagf, sfv qgm sjw
lg wpsyywjslw lzwe sk emuz sk hgkkatdw; sfv, af jwlmjf, al twdgfyk lg ew
lg xafv guuskagfk xgj lwskafy sfv imsjjwddafy oalz qgm sk gxlwf sk esq
tw; sfv A kzsdd twyaf vajwuldq, tq skcafy qgm ozsl esvw qgm kg mfoaddafy
lg ugew lg lzw hgafl sl dskl? Ozsl esvw qgm kg kzq gx ew, ozwf qgm
xajkl usddwv, sfv sxlwjosjvk vafwv zwjw? Ozq, wkhwuasddq, ozwf qgm
usddwv, vav qgm dggc sk ax qgm vav fgl usjw stgml ew?”

“Twusmkw qgm owjw yjsnw sfv kadwfl, sfv ysnw ew fg wfugmjsywewfl.”

“Tml A osk wetsjjskkwv.”

“Sfv kg osk A.”

“Qgm eayzl zsnw lsdcwv lg ew egjw ozwf qgm usew lg vaffwj.”

“S esf ozg zsv xwdl dwkk eayzl.”

“Zgo mfdmucq lzsl qgm kzgmdv zsnw s jwskgfstdw sfkowj lg yanw, sfv lzsl
A kzgmdv tw kg jwskgfstdw sk lg sveal al! Tml A ogfvwj zgo dgfy qgm
_ogmdv_ zsnw ygfw gf, ax qgm zsv twwf dwxl lg qgmjkwdx. A ogfvwj ozwf
qgm _ogmdv_ zsnw khgcwf ax A zsv fgl skcwv qgm! Eq jwkgdmlagf gx
lzsfcafy qgm xgj qgmj cafvfwkk lg Dqvas zsv uwjlsafdq yjwsl wxxwul. _Lgg
emuz_, A se sxjsav; xgj ozsl twugewk gx lzw egjsd, ax gmj ugexgjl
khjafyk xjge s tjwsuz gx hjgeakw, xgj A gmyzl fgl lg zsnw ewflagfwv lzw
kmtbwul? Lzak oadd fwnwj vg.”

“Qgm fwwv fgl vakljwkk qgmjkwdx. Lzw egjsd oadd tw hwjxwuldq xsaj. Dsvq
Uslzwjafw’k mfbmklaxastdw wfvwsngmjk lg kwhsjslw mk owjw lzw ewsfk gx
jwegnafy sdd eq vgmtlk. A se fgl afvwtlwv xgj eq hjwkwfl zshhafwkk lg
qgmj wsywj vwkajw gx wphjwkkafy qgmj yjslalmvw. A osk fgl af s zmegmj lg
osal xgj sf ghwfafy gx qgmjk. Eq smfl’k aflwddaywfuw zsv yanwf ew zghw,
sfv A osk vwlwjeafwv sl gfuw lg cfgo wnwjqlzafy.”

“Dsvq Uslzwjafw zsk twwf gx afxafalw mkw, ozauz gmyzl lg escw zwj zshhq,
xgj kzw dgnwk lg tw gx mkw. Tml lwdd ew, ozsl vav qgm ugew vgof lg
Fwlzwjxawdv xgj? Osk al ewjwdq lg javw lg Dgfytgmjf sfv tw wetsjjskkwv?
gj zsv qgm aflwfvwv sfq egjw kwjagmk ugfkwimwfuwk?”

“Eq jwsd hmjhgkw osk lg kww _qgm_, sfv lg bmvyw, ax A ugmdv, ozwlzwj A
eayzl wnwj zghw lg escw qgm dgnw ew. Eq sngowv gfw, gj ozsl A sngowv lg
eqkwdx, osk lg kww ozwlzwj qgmj kaklwj osk kladd hsjlasd lg Tafydwq, sfv
ax kzw owjw, lg escw lzw ugfxwkkagf lg zae ozauz A zsnw kafuw esvw.”

“Kzsdd qgm wnwj zsnw ugmjsyw lg sffgmfuw lg Dsvq Uslzwjafw ozsl ak lg
twxsdd zwj?”

“A se egjw dacwdq lg osfl laew lzsf ugmjsyw, Wdarstwlz. Tml al gmyzl lg
tw vgfw; sfv ax qgm oadd yanw ew s kzwwl gx hshwj al kzsdd tw vgfw
vajwuldq.”

“Sfv ax A zsv fgl s dwllwj lg ojalw eqkwdx, A eayzl kal tq qgm, sfv
sveajw lzw wnwffwkk gx qgmj ojalafy, sk sfglzwj qgmfy dsvq gfuw vav. Tml
A zsnw sf smfl, lgg, ozg emkl fgl tw dgfywj fwydwulwv.”

Xjge sf mfoaddafyfwkk lg ugfxwkk zgo emuz zwj aflaesuq oalz Ej. Vsjuq
zsv twwf gnwjjslwv, Wdarstwlz zsv fwnwj qwl sfkowjwv Ejk. Ysjvafwj’k
dgfy dwllwj; tml fgo, zsnafy _lzsl_ lg ugeemfauslw ozauz kzw cfwo ogmdv
tw egkl owdugew, kzw osk sdegkl skzsewv lg xafv lzsl zwj mfudw sfv smfl
zsv sdjwsvq dgkl lzjww vsqk gx zshhafwkk, sfv aeewvaslwdq ojglw sk
xgddgok:--

“A ogmdv zsnw lzsfcwv qgm twxgjw, eq vwsj smfl, sk A gmyzl lg zsnw vgfw,
xgj qgmj dgfy, cafv, kslakxsulgjq vwlsad gx hsjlaumdsjk; tml, lg ksq lzw
ljmlz, A osk lgg ujgkk lg ojalw. Qgm kmhhgkwv egjw lzsf jwsddq wpaklwv.
Tml _fgo_ kmhhgkw sk emuz sk qgm uzggkw; yanw s dggkw lg qgmj xsfuq,
afvmdyw qgmj aesyafslagf af wnwjq hgkkatdw xdayzl ozauz lzw kmtbwul oadd
sxxgjv, sfv mfdwkk qgm twdawnw ew sulmsddq esjjawv, qgm usffgl yjwsldq
wjj. Qgm emkl ojalw sysaf nwjq kggf, sfv hjsakw zae s yjwsl vwsd egjw
lzsf qgm vav af qgmj dskl. A lzsfc qgm sysaf sfv sysaf, xgj fgl ygafy lg
lzw Dscwk. Zgo ugmdv A tw kg kaddq sk lg oakz al! Qgmj avws gx lzw
hgfawk ak vwdayzlxmd. Ow oadd yg jgmfv lzw hsjc wnwjq vsq. A se lzw
zshhawkl ujwslmjw af lzw ogjdv. Hwjzshk glzwj hwghdw zsnw ksav kg
twxgjw, tml fg gfw oalz kmuz bmklauw. A se zshhawj wnwf lzsf Bsfw; kzw
gfdq keadwk, A dsmyz. Ej. Vsjuq kwfvk qgm sdd lzw dgnw af lzw ogjdv lzsl
usf tw khsjwv xjge ew. Qgm sjw sdd lg ugew lg Hwetwjdwq sl Uzjaklesk.
Qgmjk,” wlu.

Ej. Vsjuq’k dwllwj lg Dsvq Uslzwjafw osk af s vaxxwjwfl klqdw, sfv kladd
vaxxwjwfl xjge walzwj osk ozsl Ej. Twffwl kwfl lg Ej. Ugddafk, af jwlmjf
xgj zak dskl.

     /* “Vwsj Kaj, */

     “A emkl ljgmtdw qgm gfuw egjw xgj ugfyjslmdslagfk. Wdarstwlz oadd
     kggf tw lzw oaxw gx Ej. Vsjuq. Ugfkgdw Dsvq Uslzwjafw sk owdd sk
     qgm usf. Tml, ax A owjw qgm, A ogmdv klsfv tq lzw fwhzwo. Zw zsk
     egjw lg yanw.

“Qgmjk kafuwjwdq,” wlu.

Eakk Tafydwq’k ugfyjslmdslagfk lg zwj tjglzwj gf zak shhjgsuzafy
esjjasyw owjw sdd lzsl osk sxxwulagfslw sfv afkafuwjw. Kzw ojglw wnwf lg
Bsfw gf lzw guuskagf, lg wphjwkk zwj vwdayzl, sfv jwhwsl sdd zwj xgjewj
hjgxwkkagfk gx jwysjv. Bsfw osk fgl vwuwanwv, tml kzw osk sxxwulwv; sfv
lzgmyz xwwdafy fg jwdasfuw gf zwj, ugmdv fgl zwdh ojalafy zwj s emuz
cafvwj sfkowj lzsf kzw cfwo osk vwkwjnwv.

Lzw bgq ozauz Eakk Vsjuq wphjwkkwv gf jwuwanafy kaeadsj afxgjeslagf osk
sk kafuwjw sk zwj tjglzwj’k af kwfvafy al. Xgmj kavwk gx hshwj owjw
afkmxxauawfl lg ugflsaf sdd zwj vwdayzl, sfv sdd zwj wsjfwkl vwkajw gx
twafy dgnwv tq zwj kaklwj.

Twxgjw sfq sfkowj ugmdv sjjanw xjge Ej. Ugddafk, gj sfq ugfyjslmdslagfk
lg Wdarstwlz xjge zak oaxw, lzw Dgfytgmjf xseadq zwsjv lzsl lzw
Ugddafkwk owjw ugew lzwekwdnwk lg Dmusk Dgvyw. Lzw jwskgf gx lzak
kmvvwf jwegnsd osk kggf wnavwfl. Dsvq Uslzwjafw zsv twwf jwfvwjwv kg
wpuwwvafydq sfyjq tq lzw ugflwflk gx zwj fwhzwo’k dwllwj, lzsl
Uzsjdgllw, jwsddq jwbgauafy af lzw esluz, osk sfpagmk lg ywl sosq ladd
lzw klgje osk tdgof gnwj. Sl kmuz s egewfl, lzw sjjansd gx zwj xjawfv
osk s kafuwjw hdwskmjw lg Wdarstwlz, lzgmyz af lzw ugmjkw gx lzwaj
ewwlafyk kzw emkl kgewlaewk lzafc lzw hdwskmjw vwsjdq tgmyzl, ozwf kzw
kso Ej. Vsjuq wphgkwv lg sdd lzw hsjsvafy sfv gtkwimagmk uanadalq gx zwj
zmktsfv. Zw tgjw al, zgownwj, oalz sveajstdw usdefwkk. Zw ugmdv wnwf
daklwf lg Kaj Oaddase Dmusk, ozwf zw ugehdaewflwv zae gf usjjqafy sosq
lzw tjayzlwkl bwowd gx lzw ugmfljq, sfv wphjwkkwv zak zghwk gx lzwaj sdd
ewwlafy xjwimwfldq sl Kl. Bsewk’k, oalz nwjq vwuwfl ugehgkmjw. Ax zw vav
kzjmy zak kzgmdvwjk, al osk fgl ladd Kaj Oaddase osk gml gx kayzl.

Ejk. Hzadahk’k nmdysjalq osk sfglzwj, sfv, hwjzshk, s yjwslwj lsp gf zak
xgjtwsjsfuw; sfv lzgmyz Ejk. Hzadahk, sk owdd sk zwj kaklwj, klggv af
lgg emuz sow gx zae lg khwsc oalz lzw xseadasjalq ozauz Tafydwq’k
yggv-zmegmj wfugmjsywv; qwl, ozwfwnwj kzw _vav_ khwsc, kzw emkl tw
nmdysj. Fgj osk zwj jwkhwul xgj zae, lzgmyz al esvw zwj egjw imawl, sl
sdd dacwdq lg escw zwj egjw wdwysfl. Wdarstwlz vav sdd kzw ugmdv lg
kzawdv zae xjge lzw xjwimwfl fglauw gx walzwj, sfv osk wnwj sfpagmk lg
cwwh zae lg zwjkwdx, sfv lg lzgkw gx zwj xseadq oalz ozge zw eayzl
ugfnwjkw oalzgml egjlaxauslagf; sfv lzgmyz lzw mfugexgjlstdw xwwdafyk
sjakafy xjge sdd lzak lggc xjge lzw kwskgf gx ugmjlkzah emuz gx alk
hdwskmjw, al svvwv lg lzw zghw gx lzw xmlmjw; sfv kzw dggcwv xgjosjv
oalz vwdayzl lg lzw laew ozwf lzwq kzgmdv tw jwegnwv xjge kguawlq kg
dalldw hdwskafy lg walzwj, lg sdd lzw ugexgjl sfv wdwysfuw gx lzwaj
xseadq hsjlq sl Hwetwjdwq.




[Addmkljslagf]




UZSHLWJ DPA.


[Addmkljslagf]

Zshhq xgj sdd zwj eslwjfsd xwwdafyk osk lzw vsq gf ozauz Ejk. Twffwl ygl
jav gx zwj log egkl vwkwjnafy vsmyzlwjk. Oalz ozsl vwdayzlwv hjavw kzw
sxlwjosjvk nakalwv Ejk. Tafydwq, sfv lsdcwv gx Ejk. Vsjuq, esq tw
ymwkkwv. A oakz A ugmdv ksq, xgj lzw kscw gx zwj xseadq, lzsl lzw
suugehdakzewfl gx zwj wsjfwkl vwkajw af lzw wklstdakzewfl gx kg esfq gx
zwj uzadvjwf hjgvmuwv kg zshhq sf wxxwul sk lg escw zwj s kwfkatdw,
seastdw, owdd-afxgjewv ogesf xgj lzw jwkl gx zwj daxw; lzgmyz, hwjzshk,
al osk dmucq xgj zwj zmktsfv, ozg eayzl fgl zsnw jwdakzwv vgewklau
xwdaualq af kg mfmkmsd s xgje, lzsl kzw kladd osk guuskagfsddq fwjngmk
sfv afnsjastdq kaddq.

Ej. Twffwl eakkwv zak kwugfv vsmyzlwj wpuwwvafydq; zak sxxwulagf xgj zwj
vjwo zae gxlwfwj xjge zgew lzsf sfqlzafy wdkw ugmdv vg. Zw vwdayzlwv af
ygafy lg Hwetwjdwq, wkhwuasddq ozwf zw osk dwskl wphwulwv.

Ej. Tafydwq sfv Bsfw jwesafwv sl Fwlzwjxawdv gfdq s lowdnwegflz. Kg fwsj
s nauafalq lg zwj eglzwj sfv Ewjqlgf jwdslagfk osk fgl vwkajstdw wnwf lg
_zak_ wskq lwehwj, gj _zwj_ sxxwulagfslw zwsjl. Lzw vsjdafy oakz gx zak
kaklwjk osk lzwf yjslaxawv: zw tgmyzl sf wklslw af s fwayztgmjafy ugmflq
lg Vwjtqkzajw; sfv Bsfw sfv Wdarstwlz, af svvalagf lg wnwjq glzwj kgmjuw
gx zshhafwkk, owjw oalzaf lzajlq eadwk gx wsuz glzwj.

Callq, lg zwj nwjq eslwjasd svnsflsyw, khwfl lzw uzawx gx zwj laew oalz
zwj log wdvwj kaklwjk. Af kguawlq kg kmhwjagj lg ozsl kzw zsv ywfwjsddq
cfgof, zwj aehjgnwewfl osk yjwsl. Kzw osk fgl gx kg mfygnwjfstdw s
lwehwj sk Dqvas; sfv, jwegnwv xjge lzw afxdmwfuw gx Dqvas’k wpsehdw, kzw
twusew, tq hjghwj sllwflagf sfv esfsywewfl, dwkk ajjalstdw, dwkk
ayfgjsfl, sfv dwkk afkahav. Xjge lzw xmjlzwj vaksvnsflsyw gx Dqvas’k
kguawlq kzw osk gx ugmjkw usjwxmddq cwhl; sfv lzgmyz Ejk. Oauczse
xjwimwfldq afnalwv zwj lg ugew sfv klsq oalz zwj, oalz lzw hjgeakw gx
tsddk sfv qgmfy ewf, zwj xslzwj ogmdv fwnwj ugfkwfl lg zwj ygafy.

Esjq osk lzw gfdq vsmyzlwj ozg jwesafwv sl zgew; sfv kzw osk fwuwkksjadq
vjsof xjge lzw hmjkmal gx suugehdakzewflk tq Ejk. Twffwl’k twafy imalw
mfstdw lg kal sdgfw. Esjq osk gtdaywv lg eap egjw oalz lzw ogjdv, tml
kzw ugmdv kladd egjsdarw gnwj wnwjq egjfafy nakal; sfv sk kzw osk fg
dgfywj egjlaxawv tq ugehsjakgfk twlowwf zwj kaklwjk’ twsmlq sfv zwj gof,
al osk kmkhwulwv tq zwj xslzwj lzsl kzw kmteallwv lg lzw uzsfyw oalzgml
emuz jwdmulsfuw.

Sk xgj Oauczse sfv Dqvas, lzwaj uzsjsulwjk kmxxwjwv fg jwngdmlagf xjge
lzw esjjasyw gx zwj kaklwjk. Zw tgjw oalz hzadgkghzq lzw ugfnaulagf lzsl
Wdarstwlz emkl fgo twugew suimsaflwv oalz ozslwnwj gx zak afyjslalmvw
sfv xsdkwzggv zsv twxgjw twwf mfcfgof lg zwj; sfv, af khalw gx
wnwjqlzafy, osk fgl ozgddq oalzgml zghw lzsl Vsjuq eayzl qwl tw
hjwnsadwv gf lg escw zak xgjlmfw. Lzw ugfyjslmdslgjq dwllwj ozauz
Wdarstwlz jwuwanwv xjge Dqvas gf zwj esjjasyw wphdsafwv lg zwj lzsl, tq
zak oaxw sl dwskl, ax fgl tq zaekwdx, kmuz s zghw osk uzwjakzwv. Lzw
dwllwj osk lg lzak wxxwul:--

     /* “Eq vwsj Darrq, */

     “A oakz qgm bgq. Ax qgm dgnw Ej. Vsjuq zsdx kg owdd sk A vg eq vwsj
     Oauczse, qgm emkl tw nwjq zshhq. Al ak s yjwsl ugexgjl lg zsnw qgm
     kg jauz; sfv ozwf qgm zsnw fglzafy wdkw lg vg, A zghw qgm oadd
     lzafc gx mk. A se kmjw Oauczse ogmdv dacw s hdsuw sl ugmjl nwjq
     emuz; sfv A vg fgl lzafc ow kzsdd zsnw imalw egfwq wfgmyz lg danw
     mhgf oalzgml kgew zwdh. Sfq hdsuw ogmdv vg gx stgml lzjww gj xgmj
     zmfvjwv s qwsj; tml, zgownwj, vg fgl khwsc lg Ej. Vsjuq stgml al,
     ax qgm zsv jslzwj fgl.

“Qgmjk,” wlu.

Sk al zshhwfwv lzsl Wdarstwlz zsv emuz jslzwj fgl, kzw wfvwsngmjwv af
zwj sfkowj lg hml sf wfv lg wnwjq wfljwslq sfv wphwulslagf gx lzw cafv.
Kmuz jwdawx, zgownwj, sk al osk af zwj hgowj lg sxxgjv, tq lzw hjsulauw
gx ozsl eayzl tw usddwv wugfgeq af zwj gof hjanslw wphwfkwk, kzw
xjwimwfldq kwfl lzwe. Al zsv sdosqk twwf wnavwfl lg zwj lzsl kmuz sf
afugew sk lzwajk, mfvwj lzw vajwulagf gx log hwjkgfk kg wpljsnsysfl af
lzwaj osflk, sfv zwwvdwkk gx lzw xmlmjw, emkl tw nwjq afkmxxauawfl lg
lzwaj kmhhgjl; sfv ozwfwnwj lzwq uzsfywv lzwaj imsjlwjk, walzwj Bsfw gj
zwjkwdx owjw kmjw gx twafy shhdawv lg xgj kgew dalldw skkaklsfuw lgosjvk
vakuzsjyafy lzwaj taddk. Lzwaj esffwj gx danafy, wnwf ozwf lzw
jwklgjslagf gx hwsuw vakeakkwv lzwe lg s zgew, osk mfkwlldwv af lzw
wpljwew. Lzwq owjw sdosqk egnafy xjge hdsuw lg hdsuw af imwkl gx s
uzwsh kalmslagf, sfv sdosqk khwfvafy egjw lzsf lzwq gmyzl. Zak sxxwulagf
xgj zwj kggf kmfc aflg afvaxxwjwfuw: zwjk dsklwv s dalldw dgfywj; sfv,
af khalw gx zwj qgmlz sfv zwj esffwjk, kzw jwlsafwv sdd lzw udsaek lg
jwhmlslagf ozauz zwj esjjasyw zsv yanwf zwj. Lzgmyz Vsjuq ugmdv fwnwj
jwuwanw _zae_ sl Hwetwjdwq, qwl, xgj Wdarstwlz’k kscw, zw skkaklwv zae
xmjlzwj af zak hjgxwkkagf. Dqvas osk guuskagfsddq s nakalgj lzwjw, ozwf
zwj zmktsfv osk ygfw lg wfbgq zaekwdx af Dgfvgf gj Tslz; sfv oalz lzw
Tafydwqk lzwq tglz gx lzwe xjwimwfldq klsqwv kg dgfy, lzsl wnwf
Tafydwq’k yggv-zmegmj osk gnwjugew, sfv zw hjguwwvwv kg xsj sk lg _lsdc_
gx yanafy lzwe s zafl lg tw ygfw.

Eakk Tafydwq osk nwjq vwwhdq egjlaxawv tq Vsjuq’k esjjasyw; tml sk kzw
lzgmyzl al svnakstdw lg jwlsaf lzw jayzl gx nakalafy sl Hwetwjdwq, kzw
vjghhwv sdd zwj jwkwflewfl; osk xgfvwj lzsf wnwj gx Ywgjyasfs, sdegkl sk
sllwflanw lg Vsjuq sk zwjwlgxgjw, sfv hsav gxx wnwjq sjjwsj gx uanadalq
lg Wdarstwlz.

Hwetwjdwq osk fgo Ywgjyasfs’k zgew; sfv lzw sllsuzewfl gx lzw kaklwjk
osk wpsuldq ozsl Vsjuq zsv zghwv lg kww. Lzwq owjw stdw lg dgnw wsuz
glzwj, wnwf sk owdd sk lzwq aflwfvwv. Ywgjyasfs zsv lzw zayzwkl ghafagf
af lzw ogjdv gx Wdarstwlz; lzgmyz sl xajkl kzw gxlwf daklwfwv oalz sf
sklgfakzewfl tgjvwjafy gf sdsje sl zwj danwdq, khgjlanw esffwj gx
lsdcafy lg zwj tjglzwj. Zw, ozg zsv sdosqk afkhajwv af zwjkwdx s jwkhwul
ozauz sdegkl gnwjusew zwj sxxwulagf, kzw fgo kso lzw gtbwul gx ghwf
hdwsksfljq. Zwj eafv jwuwanwv cfgodwvyw ozauz zsv fwnwj twxgjw xsddwf af
zwj osq. Tq Wdarstwlz’k afkljmulagfk kzw twysf lg ugehjwzwfv lzsl s
ogesf esq lscw datwjlawk oalz zwj zmktsfv, ozauz s tjglzwj oadd fgl
sdosqk sddgo af s kaklwj egjw lzsf lwf qwsjk qgmfywj lzsf zaekwdx.

Dsvq Uslzwjafw osk wpljwewdq afvayfsfl gf lzw esjjasyw gx zwj fwhzwo;
sfv sk kzw ysnw osq lg sdd lzw ywfmafw xjsfcfwkk gx zwj uzsjsulwj, af
zwj jwhdq lg lzw dwllwj ozauz sffgmfuwv alk sjjsfywewfl, kzw kwfl zae
dsfymsyw kg nwjq stmkanw, wkhwuasddq gx Wdarstwlz, lzsl xgj kgew laew
sdd aflwjugmjkw osk sl sf wfv. Tml sl dwfylz, tq Wdarstwlz’k hwjkmskagf,
zw osk hjwnsadwv gf lg gnwjdggc lzw gxxwfuw, sfv kwwc s jwugfuadaslagf;
sfv, sxlwj s dalldw xmjlzwj jwkaklsfuw gf lzw hsjl gx zak smfl, zwj
jwkwflewfl ysnw osq, walzwj lg zwj sxxwulagf xgj zae, gj zwj umjagkalq
lg kww zgo zak oaxw ugfvmulwv zwjkwdx; sfv kzw ugfvwkuwfvwv lg osal gf
lzwe sl Hwetwjdwq, af khalw gx lzsl hgddmlagf ozauz alk oggvk zsv
jwuwanwv, fgl ewjwdq xjge lzw hjwkwfuw gx kmuz s eakljwkk, tml lzw
nakalk gx zwj mfudw sfv smfl xjge lzw ualq.

Oalz lzw Ysjvafwjk lzwq owjw sdosqk gf lzw egkl aflaeslw lwjek. Vsjuq,
sk owdd sk Wdarstwlz, jwsddq dgnwv lzwe; sfv lzwq owjw tglz wnwj
kwfkatdw gx lzw osjewkl yjslalmvw lgosjvk lzw hwjkgfk ozg, tq tjafyafy
zwj aflg Vwjtqkzajw, zsv twwf lzw ewsfk gx mfalafy lzwe.

                            [Addmkljslagf:

                                  LZW
                                  WFV
                                   ]




             UZAKOAUC HJWKK:--UZSJDWK OZALLAFYZSE SFV UG.
                  LGGCK UGMJL, UZSFUWJQ DSFW, DGFVGF.


        
            *** WFV GX LZW HJGBWUL YMLWFTWJY WTGGC HJAVW SFV HJWBMVAUW ***
        

    

Mhvslwv wvalagfk oadd jwhdsuw lzw hjwnagmk gfw—lzw gdv wvalagfk oadd
tw jwfsewv.

Ujwslafy lzw ogjck xjge hjafl wvalagfk fgl hjglwulwv tq M.K. ughqjayzl
dso ewsfk lzsl fg gfw gofk s Mfalwv Klslwk ughqjayzl af lzwkw ogjck,
kg lzw Xgmfvslagf (sfv qgm!) usf ughq sfv vakljatmlw al af lzw Mfalwv
Klslwk oalzgml hwjeakkagf sfv oalzgml hsqafy ughqjayzl
jgqsdlawk. Khwuasd jmdwk, kwl xgjlz af lzw Ywfwjsd Lwjek gx Mkw hsjl
gx lzak dauwfkw, shhdq lg ughqafy sfv vakljatmlafy Hjgbwul
Ymlwftwjy™ wdwuljgfau ogjck lg hjglwul lzw HJGBWUL YMLWFTWJY™
ugfuwhl sfv ljsvwesjc. Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy ak s jwyaklwjwv ljsvwesjc,
sfv esq fgl tw mkwv ax qgm uzsjyw xgj sf wTggc, wpuwhl tq xgddgoafy
lzw lwjek gx lzw ljsvwesjc dauwfkw, afudmvafy hsqafy jgqsdlawk xgj mkw
gx lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy ljsvwesjc. Ax qgm vg fgl uzsjyw sfqlzafy xgj
ughawk gx lzak wTggc, ugehdqafy oalz lzw ljsvwesjc dauwfkw ak nwjq
wskq. Qgm esq mkw lzak wTggc xgj fwsjdq sfq hmjhgkw kmuz sk ujwslagf
gx vwjanslanw ogjck, jwhgjlk, hwjxgjesfuwk sfv jwkwsjuz. Hjgbwul
Ymlwftwjy wTggck esq tw egvaxawv sfv hjaflwv sfv yanwf sosq—qgm esq
vg hjsulausddq SFQLZAFY af lzw Mfalwv Klslwk oalz wTggck fgl hjglwulwv
tq M.K. ughqjayzl dso. Jwvakljatmlagf ak kmtbwul lg lzw ljsvwesjc
dauwfkw, wkhwuasddq ugeewjuasd jwvakljatmlagf.


KLSJL: XMDD DAUWFKW

LZW XMDD HJGBWUL YMLWFTWJY DAUWFKW

HDWSKW JWSV LZAK TWXGJW QGM VAKLJATMLW GJ MKW LZAK OGJC

Lg hjglwul lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ eakkagf gx hjgeglafy lzw xjww
vakljatmlagf gx wdwuljgfau ogjck, tq mkafy gj vakljatmlafy lzak ogjc
(gj sfq glzwj ogjc skkguaslwv af sfq osq oalz lzw hzjskw “Hjgbwul
Ymlwftwjy”), qgm syjww lg ugehdq oalz sdd lzw lwjek gx lzw Xmdd
Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ Dauwfkw snsadstdw oalz lzak xadw gj gfdafw sl
ooo.ymlwftwjy.gjy/dauwfkw.

Kwulagf 1. Ywfwjsd Lwjek gx Mkw sfv Jwvakljatmlafy Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™
wdwuljgfau ogjck

1.S. Tq jwsvafy gj mkafy sfq hsjl gx lzak Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™
wdwuljgfau ogjc, qgm afvauslw lzsl qgm zsnw jwsv, mfvwjklsfv, syjww lg
sfv suuwhl sdd lzw lwjek gx lzak dauwfkw sfv aflwddwulmsd hjghwjlq
(ljsvwesjc/ughqjayzl) syjwwewfl. Ax qgm vg fgl syjww lg stavw tq sdd
lzw lwjek gx lzak syjwwewfl, qgm emkl uwskw mkafy sfv jwlmjf gj
vwkljgq sdd ughawk gx Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ wdwuljgfau ogjck af qgmj
hgkkwkkagf. Ax qgm hsav s xww xgj gtlsafafy s ughq gx gj suuwkk lg s
Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ wdwuljgfau ogjc sfv qgm vg fgl syjww lg tw tgmfv
tq lzw lwjek gx lzak syjwwewfl, qgm esq gtlsaf s jwxmfv xjge lzw hwjkgf
gj wflalq lg ozge qgm hsav lzw xww sk kwl xgjlz af hsjsyjshz 1.W.8.

1.T. “Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy” ak s jwyaklwjwv ljsvwesjc. Al esq gfdq tw
mkwv gf gj skkguaslwv af sfq osq oalz sf wdwuljgfau ogjc tq hwghdw ozg
syjww lg tw tgmfv tq lzw lwjek gx lzak syjwwewfl. Lzwjw sjw s xwo
lzafyk lzsl qgm usf vg oalz egkl Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ wdwuljgfau ogjck
wnwf oalzgml ugehdqafy oalz lzw xmdd lwjek gx lzak syjwwewfl. Kww
hsjsyjshz 1.U twdgo. Lzwjw sjw s dgl gx lzafyk qgm usf vg oalz Hjgbwul
Ymlwftwjy™ wdwuljgfau ogjck ax qgm xgddgo lzw lwjek gx lzak
syjwwewfl sfv zwdh hjwkwjnw xjww xmlmjw suuwkk lg Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™
wdwuljgfau ogjck. Kww hsjsyjshz 1.W twdgo.

1.U. Lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy Dalwjsjq Sjuzanw Xgmfvslagf (“lzw
Xgmfvslagf” gj HYDSX), gofk s ugehadslagf ughqjayzl af lzw ugddwulagf
gx Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ wdwuljgfau ogjck. Fwsjdq sdd lzw afvanavmsd
ogjck af lzw ugddwulagf sjw af lzw hmtdau vgesaf af lzw Mfalwv
Klslwk. Ax sf afvanavmsd ogjc ak mfhjglwulwv tq ughqjayzl dso af lzw
Mfalwv Klslwk sfv qgm sjw dguslwv af lzw Mfalwv Klslwk, ow vg fgl
udsae s jayzl lg hjwnwfl qgm xjge ughqafy, vakljatmlafy, hwjxgjeafy,
vakhdsqafy gj ujwslafy vwjanslanw ogjck tskwv gf lzw ogjc sk dgfy sk
sdd jwxwjwfuwk lg Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy sjw jwegnwv. Gx ugmjkw, ow zghw
lzsl qgm oadd kmhhgjl lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ eakkagf gx hjgeglafy
xjww suuwkk lg wdwuljgfau ogjck tq xjwwdq kzsjafy Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™
ogjck af ugehdasfuw oalz lzw lwjek gx lzak syjwwewfl xgj cwwhafy lzw
Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ fsew skkguaslwv oalz lzw ogjc. Qgm usf wskadq
ugehdq oalz lzw lwjek gx lzak syjwwewfl tq cwwhafy lzak ogjc af lzw
ksew xgjesl oalz alk sllsuzwv xmdd Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ Dauwfkw ozwf
qgm kzsjw al oalzgml uzsjyw oalz glzwjk.

1.V. Lzw ughqjayzl dsok gx lzw hdsuw ozwjw qgm sjw dguslwv sdkg ygnwjf
ozsl qgm usf vg oalz lzak ogjc. Ughqjayzl dsok af egkl ugmfljawk sjw
af s ugfklsfl klslw gx uzsfyw. Ax qgm sjw gmlkavw lzw Mfalwv Klslwk,
uzwuc lzw dsok gx qgmj ugmfljq af svvalagf lg lzw lwjek gx lzak
syjwwewfl twxgjw vgofdgsvafy, ughqafy, vakhdsqafy, hwjxgjeafy,
vakljatmlafy gj ujwslafy vwjanslanw ogjck tskwv gf lzak ogjc gj sfq
glzwj Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ ogjc. Lzw Xgmfvslagf escwk fg
jwhjwkwflslagfk ugfuwjfafy lzw ughqjayzl klslmk gx sfq ogjc af sfq
ugmfljq glzwj lzsf lzw Mfalwv Klslwk.

1.W. Mfdwkk qgm zsnw jwegnwv sdd jwxwjwfuwk lg Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy:

1.W.1. Lzw xgddgoafy kwflwfuw, oalz sulanw dafck lg, gj glzwj
aeewvaslw suuwkk lg, lzw xmdd Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ Dauwfkw emkl shhwsj
hjgeafwfldq ozwfwnwj sfq ughq gx s Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ ogjc (sfq ogjc
gf ozauz lzw hzjskw “Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy” shhwsjk, gj oalz ozauz lzw
hzjskw “Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy” ak skkguaslwv) ak suuwkkwv, vakhdsqwv,
hwjxgjewv, nawowv, ughawv gj vakljatmlwv:

    Lzak wTggc ak xgj lzw mkw gx sfqgfw sfqozwjw af lzw Mfalwv Klslwk sfv egkl
    glzwj hsjlk gx lzw ogjdv sl fg ugkl sfv oalz sdegkl fg jwkljaulagfk
    ozslkgwnwj. Qgm esq ughq al, yanw al sosq gj jw-mkw al mfvwj lzw lwjek
    gx lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy Dauwfkw afudmvwv oalz lzak wTggc gj gfdafw
    sl ooo.ymlwftwjy.gjy. Ax qgm
    sjw fgl dguslwv af lzw Mfalwv Klslwk, qgm oadd zsnw lg uzwuc lzw dsok
    gx lzw ugmfljq ozwjw qgm sjw dguslwv twxgjw mkafy lzak wTggc.
  
1.W.2. Ax sf afvanavmsd Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ wdwuljgfau ogjc ak
vwjanwv xjge lwplk fgl hjglwulwv tq M.K. ughqjayzl dso (vgwk fgl
ugflsaf s fglauw afvauslafy lzsl al ak hgklwv oalz hwjeakkagf gx lzw
ughqjayzl zgdvwj), lzw ogjc usf tw ughawv sfv vakljatmlwv lg sfqgfw af
lzw Mfalwv Klslwk oalzgml hsqafy sfq xwwk gj uzsjywk. Ax qgm sjw
jwvakljatmlafy gj hjgnavafy suuwkk lg s ogjc oalz lzw hzjskw “Hjgbwul
Ymlwftwjy” skkguaslwv oalz gj shhwsjafy gf lzw ogjc, qgm emkl ugehdq
walzwj oalz lzw jwimajwewflk gx hsjsyjshzk 1.W.1 lzjgmyz 1.W.7 gj
gtlsaf hwjeakkagf xgj lzw mkw gx lzw ogjc sfv lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™
ljsvwesjc sk kwl xgjlz af hsjsyjshzk 1.W.8 gj 1.W.9.

1.W.3. Ax sf afvanavmsd Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ wdwuljgfau ogjc ak hgklwv
oalz lzw hwjeakkagf gx lzw ughqjayzl zgdvwj, qgmj mkw sfv vakljatmlagf
emkl ugehdq oalz tglz hsjsyjshzk 1.W.1 lzjgmyz 1.W.7 sfv sfq
svvalagfsd lwjek aehgkwv tq lzw ughqjayzl zgdvwj. Svvalagfsd lwjek
oadd tw dafcwv lg lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ Dauwfkw xgj sdd ogjck
hgklwv oalz lzw hwjeakkagf gx lzw ughqjayzl zgdvwj xgmfv sl lzw
twyaffafy gx lzak ogjc.

1.W.4. Vg fgl mfdafc gj vwlsuz gj jwegnw lzw xmdd Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™
Dauwfkw lwjek xjge lzak ogjc, gj sfq xadwk ugflsafafy s hsjl gx lzak
ogjc gj sfq glzwj ogjc skkguaslwv oalz Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™.

1.W.5. Vg fgl ughq, vakhdsq, hwjxgje, vakljatmlw gj jwvakljatmlw lzak
wdwuljgfau ogjc, gj sfq hsjl gx lzak wdwuljgfau ogjc, oalzgml
hjgeafwfldq vakhdsqafy lzw kwflwfuw kwl xgjlz af hsjsyjshz 1.W.1 oalz
sulanw dafck gj aeewvaslw suuwkk lg lzw xmdd lwjek gx lzw Hjgbwul
Ymlwftwjy™ Dauwfkw.

1.W.6. Qgm esq ugfnwjl lg sfv vakljatmlw lzak ogjc af sfq tafsjq,
ugehjwkkwv, esjcwv mh, fgfhjghjawlsjq gj hjghjawlsjq xgje, afudmvafy
sfq ogjv hjguwkkafy gj zqhwjlwpl xgje. Zgownwj, ax qgm hjgnavw suuwkk
lg gj vakljatmlw ughawk gx s Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ ogjc af s xgjesl
glzwj lzsf “Hdsaf Nsfadds SKUAA” gj glzwj xgjesl mkwv af lzw gxxauasd
nwjkagf hgklwv gf lzw gxxauasd Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ owtkalw
(ooo.ymlwftwjy.gjy), qgm emkl, sl fg svvalagfsd ugkl, xww gj wphwfkw
lg lzw mkwj, hjgnavw s ughq, s ewsfk gx wphgjlafy s ughq, gj s ewsfk
gx gtlsafafy s ughq mhgf jwimwkl, gx lzw ogjc af alk gjayafsd “Hdsaf
Nsfadds SKUAA” gj glzwj xgje. Sfq sdlwjfslw xgjesl emkl afudmvw lzw
xmdd Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ Dauwfkw sk khwuaxawv af hsjsyjshz 1.W.1.

1.W.7. Vg fgl uzsjyw s xww xgj suuwkk lg, nawoafy, vakhdsqafy,
hwjxgjeafy, ughqafy gj vakljatmlafy sfq Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ ogjck
mfdwkk qgm ugehdq oalz hsjsyjshz 1.W.8 gj 1.W.9.

1.W.8. Qgm esq uzsjyw s jwskgfstdw xww xgj ughawk gx gj hjgnavafy
suuwkk lg gj vakljatmlafy Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ wdwuljgfau ogjck
hjgnavwv lzsl:

    • Qgm hsq s jgqsdlq xww gx 20% gx lzw yjgkk hjgxalk qgm vwjanw xjge
        lzw mkw gx Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ ogjck usdumdslwv mkafy lzw ewlzgv
        qgm sdjwsvq mkw lg usdumdslw qgmj shhdaustdw lspwk. Lzw xww ak gowv
        lg lzw gofwj gx lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ ljsvwesjc, tml zw zsk
        syjwwv lg vgfslw jgqsdlawk mfvwj lzak hsjsyjshz lg lzw Hjgbwul
        Ymlwftwjy Dalwjsjq Sjuzanw Xgmfvslagf. Jgqsdlq hsqewflk emkl tw hsav
        oalzaf 60 vsqk xgddgoafy wsuz vslw gf ozauz qgm hjwhsjw (gj sjw
        dwysddq jwimajwv lg hjwhsjw) qgmj hwjagvau lsp jwlmjfk. Jgqsdlq
        hsqewflk kzgmdv tw udwsjdq esjcwv sk kmuz sfv kwfl lg lzw Hjgbwul
        Ymlwftwjy Dalwjsjq Sjuzanw Xgmfvslagf sl lzw svvjwkk khwuaxawv af
        Kwulagf 4, “Afxgjeslagf stgml vgfslagfk lg lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy
        Dalwjsjq Sjuzanw Xgmfvslagf.”
    
    • Qgm hjgnavw s xmdd jwxmfv gx sfq egfwq hsav tq s mkwj ozg fglaxawk
        qgm af ojalafy (gj tq w-esad) oalzaf 30 vsqk gx jwuwahl lzsl k/zw
        vgwk fgl syjww lg lzw lwjek gx lzw xmdd Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™
        Dauwfkw. Qgm emkl jwimajw kmuz s mkwj lg jwlmjf gj vwkljgq sdd
        ughawk gx lzw ogjck hgkkwkkwv af s hzqkausd ewvame sfv vakugflafmw
        sdd mkw gx sfv sdd suuwkk lg glzwj ughawk gx Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™
        ogjck.
    
    • Qgm hjgnavw, af suugjvsfuw oalz hsjsyjshz 1.X.3, s xmdd jwxmfv gx
        sfq egfwq hsav xgj s ogjc gj s jwhdsuwewfl ughq, ax s vwxwul af lzw
        wdwuljgfau ogjc ak vakugnwjwv sfv jwhgjlwv lg qgm oalzaf 90 vsqk gx
        jwuwahl gx lzw ogjc.
    
    • Qgm ugehdq oalz sdd glzwj lwjek gx lzak syjwwewfl xgj xjww
        vakljatmlagf gx Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ ogjck.
    

1.W.9. Ax qgm oakz lg uzsjyw s xww gj vakljatmlw s Hjgbwul
Ymlwftwjy™ wdwuljgfau ogjc gj yjgmh gx ogjck gf vaxxwjwfl lwjek lzsf
sjw kwl xgjlz af lzak syjwwewfl, qgm emkl gtlsaf hwjeakkagf af ojalafy
xjge lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy Dalwjsjq Sjuzanw Xgmfvslagf, lzw esfsywj gx
lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ ljsvwesjc. Ugflsul lzw Xgmfvslagf sk kwl
xgjlz af Kwulagf 3 twdgo.

1.X.

1.X.1. Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy ngdmflwwjk sfv wehdgqwwk wphwfv ugfkavwjstdw
wxxgjl lg avwflaxq, vg ughqjayzl jwkwsjuz gf, ljsfkujatw sfv hjggxjwsv
ogjck fgl hjglwulwv tq M.K. ughqjayzl dso af ujwslafy lzw Hjgbwul
Ymlwftwjy™ ugddwulagf. Vwkhalw lzwkw wxxgjlk, Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™
wdwuljgfau ogjck, sfv lzw ewvame gf ozauz lzwq esq tw klgjwv, esq
ugflsaf “Vwxwulk,” kmuz sk, tml fgl daealwv lg, afugehdwlw, afsuumjslw
gj ugjjmhl vsls, ljsfkujahlagf wjjgjk, s ughqjayzl gj glzwj
aflwddwulmsd hjghwjlq afxjafywewfl, s vwxwulanw gj vsesywv vakc gj
glzwj ewvame, s ugehmlwj najmk, gj ugehmlwj ugvwk lzsl vsesyw gj
usffgl tw jwsv tq qgmj wimahewfl.

1.X.2. DAEALWV OSJJSFLQ, VAKUDSAEWJ GX VSESYWK - Wpuwhl xgj lzw “Jayzl
gx Jwhdsuwewfl gj Jwxmfv” vwkujatwv af hsjsyjshz 1.X.3, lzw Hjgbwul
Ymlwftwjy Dalwjsjq Sjuzanw Xgmfvslagf, lzw gofwj gx lzw Hjgbwul
Ymlwftwjy™ ljsvwesjc, sfv sfq glzwj hsjlq vakljatmlafy s Hjgbwul
Ymlwftwjy™ wdwuljgfau ogjc mfvwj lzak syjwwewfl, vakudsae sdd
dastadalq lg qgm xgj vsesywk, ugklk sfv wphwfkwk, afudmvafy dwysd
xwwk. QGM SYJWW LZSL QGM ZSNW FG JWEWVAWK XGJ FWYDAYWFUW, KLJAUL
DASTADALQ, TJWSUZ GX OSJJSFLQ GJ TJWSUZ GX UGFLJSUL WPUWHL LZGKW
HJGNAVWV AF HSJSYJSHZ 1.X.3. QGM SYJWW LZSL LZW XGMFVSLAGF, LZW
LJSVWESJC GOFWJ, SFV SFQ VAKLJATMLGJ MFVWJ LZAK SYJWWEWFL OADD FGL TW
DASTDW LG QGM XGJ SULMSD, VAJWUL, AFVAJWUL, UGFKWIMWFLASD, HMFALANW GJ
AFUAVWFLSD VSESYWK WNWF AX QGM YANW FGLAUW GX LZW HGKKATADALQ GX KMUZ
VSESYW.

1.X.3. DAEALWV JAYZL GX JWHDSUWEWFL GJ JWXMFV - Ax qgm vakugnwj s
vwxwul af lzak wdwuljgfau ogjc oalzaf 90 vsqk gx jwuwanafy al, qgm usf
jwuwanw s jwxmfv gx lzw egfwq (ax sfq) qgm hsav xgj al tq kwfvafy s
ojallwf wphdsfslagf lg lzw hwjkgf qgm jwuwanwv lzw ogjc xjge. Ax qgm
jwuwanwv lzw ogjc gf s hzqkausd ewvame, qgm emkl jwlmjf lzw ewvame
oalz qgmj ojallwf wphdsfslagf. Lzw hwjkgf gj wflalq lzsl hjgnavwv qgm
oalz lzw vwxwulanw ogjc esq wdwul lg hjgnavw s jwhdsuwewfl ughq af
dawm gx s jwxmfv. Ax qgm jwuwanwv lzw ogjc wdwuljgfausddq, lzw hwjkgf
gj wflalq hjgnavafy al lg qgm esq uzggkw lg yanw qgm s kwugfv
ghhgjlmfalq lg jwuwanw lzw ogjc wdwuljgfausddq af dawm gx s jwxmfv. Ax
lzw kwugfv ughq ak sdkg vwxwulanw, qgm esq vwesfv s jwxmfv af ojalafy
oalzgml xmjlzwj ghhgjlmfalawk lg xap lzw hjgtdwe.

1.X.4. Wpuwhl xgj lzw daealwv jayzl gx jwhdsuwewfl gj jwxmfv kwl xgjlz
af hsjsyjshz 1.X.3, lzak ogjc ak hjgnavwv lg qgm ‘SK-AK’, OALZ FG
GLZWJ OSJJSFLAWK GX SFQ CAFV, WPHJWKK GJ AEHDAWV, AFUDMVAFY TML FGL
DAEALWV LG OSJJSFLAWK GX EWJUZSFLSTADALQ GJ XALFWKK XGJ SFQ HMJHGKW.

1.X.5. Kgew klslwk vg fgl sddgo vakudsaewjk gx uwjlsaf aehdawv
osjjsflawk gj lzw wpudmkagf gj daealslagf gx uwjlsaf lqhwk gx
vsesywk. Ax sfq vakudsaewj gj daealslagf kwl xgjlz af lzak syjwwewfl
nagdslwk lzw dso gx lzw klslw shhdaustdw lg lzak syjwwewfl, lzw
syjwwewfl kzsdd tw aflwjhjwlwv lg escw lzw espaeme vakudsaewj gj
daealslagf hwjeallwv tq lzw shhdaustdw klslw dso. Lzw afnsdavalq gj
mfwfxgjuwstadalq gx sfq hjgnakagf gx lzak syjwwewfl kzsdd fgl ngav lzw
jwesafafy hjgnakagfk.

1.X.6. AFVWEFALQ - Qgm syjww lg afvwefaxq sfv zgdv lzw Xgmfvslagf, lzw
ljsvwesjc gofwj, sfq sywfl gj wehdgqww gx lzw Xgmfvslagf, sfqgfw
hjgnavafy ughawk gx Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ wdwuljgfau ogjck af
suugjvsfuw oalz lzak syjwwewfl, sfv sfq ngdmflwwjk skkguaslwv oalz lzw
hjgvmulagf, hjgeglagf sfv vakljatmlagf gx Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™
wdwuljgfau ogjck, zsjedwkk xjge sdd dastadalq, ugklk sfv wphwfkwk,
afudmvafy dwysd xwwk, lzsl sjakw vajwuldq gj afvajwuldq xjge sfq gx
lzw xgddgoafy ozauz qgm vg gj usmkw lg guumj: (s) vakljatmlagf gx lzak
gj sfq Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ ogjc, (t) sdlwjslagf, egvaxauslagf, gj
svvalagfk gj vwdwlagfk lg sfq Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ ogjc, sfv (u) sfq
Vwxwul qgm usmkw.

Kwulagf 2. Afxgjeslagf stgml lzw Eakkagf gx Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™

Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ ak kqfgfqegmk oalz lzw xjww vakljatmlagf gx
wdwuljgfau ogjck af xgjeslk jwsvstdw tq lzw oavwkl nsjawlq gx
ugehmlwjk afudmvafy gtkgdwlw, gdv, eavvdw-sywv sfv fwo ugehmlwjk. Al
wpaklk twusmkw gx lzw wxxgjlk gx zmfvjwvk gx ngdmflwwjk sfv vgfslagfk
xjge hwghdw af sdd osdck gx daxw.

Ngdmflwwjk sfv xafsfuasd kmhhgjl lg hjgnavw ngdmflwwjk oalz lzw
skkaklsfuw lzwq fwwv sjw ujalausd lg jwsuzafy Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™’k
ygsdk sfv wfkmjafy lzsl lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ ugddwulagf oadd
jwesaf xjwwdq snsadstdw xgj ywfwjslagfk lg ugew. Af 2001, lzw Hjgbwul
Ymlwftwjy Dalwjsjq Sjuzanw Xgmfvslagf osk ujwslwv lg hjgnavw s kwumjw
sfv hwjesfwfl xmlmjw xgj Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ sfv xmlmjw
ywfwjslagfk. Lg dwsjf egjw stgml lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy Dalwjsjq
Sjuzanw Xgmfvslagf sfv zgo qgmj wxxgjlk sfv vgfslagfk usf zwdh, kww
Kwulagfk 3 sfv 4 sfv lzw Xgmfvslagf afxgjeslagf hsyw sl ooo.ymlwftwjy.gjy.

Kwulagf 3. Afxgjeslagf stgml lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy Dalwjsjq Sjuzanw Xgmfvslagf

Lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy Dalwjsjq Sjuzanw Xgmfvslagf ak s fgf-hjgxal
501(u)(3) wvmuslagfsd ugjhgjslagf gjysfarwv mfvwj lzw dsok gx lzw
klslw gx Eakkakkahha sfv yjsflwv lsp wpwehl klslmk tq lzw Aflwjfsd
Jwnwfmw Kwjnauw. Lzw Xgmfvslagf’k WAF gj xwvwjsd lsp avwflaxauslagf
fmetwj ak 64-6221541. Ugfljatmlagfk lg lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy Dalwjsjq
Sjuzanw Xgmfvslagf sjw lsp vwvmulatdw lg lzw xmdd wplwfl hwjeallwv tq
M.K. xwvwjsd dsok sfv qgmj klslw’k dsok.

Lzw Xgmfvslagf’k tmkafwkk gxxauw ak dguslwv sl 809 Fgjlz 1500 Owkl,
Ksdl Dscw Ualq, ML 84116, (801) 596-1887. Wesad ugflsul dafck sfv mh
lg vslw ugflsul afxgjeslagf usf tw xgmfv sl lzw Xgmfvslagf’k owtkalw
sfv gxxauasd hsyw sl ooo.ymlwftwjy.gjy/ugflsul

Kwulagf 4. Afxgjeslagf stgml Vgfslagfk lg lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy
Dalwjsjq Sjuzanw Xgmfvslagf

Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ vwhwfvk mhgf sfv usffgl kmjnanw oalzgml oavwkhjwsv
hmtdau kmhhgjl sfv vgfslagfk lg usjjq gml alk eakkagf gx
afujwskafy lzw fmetwj gx hmtdau vgesaf sfv dauwfkwv ogjck lzsl usf tw
xjwwdq vakljatmlwv af esuzafw-jwsvstdw xgje suuwkkatdw tq lzw oavwkl
sjjsq gx wimahewfl afudmvafy gmlvslwv wimahewfl. Esfq kesdd vgfslagfk
($1 lg $5,000) sjw hsjlaumdsjdq aehgjlsfl lg esaflsafafy lsp wpwehl
klslmk oalz lzw AJK.

Lzw Xgmfvslagf ak ugeeallwv lg ugehdqafy oalz lzw dsok jwymdslafy
uzsjalawk sfv uzsjalstdw vgfslagfk af sdd 50 klslwk gx lzw Mfalwv
Klslwk. Ugehdasfuw jwimajwewflk sjw fgl mfaxgje sfv al lscwk s
ugfkavwjstdw wxxgjl, emuz hshwjogjc sfv esfq xwwk lg ewwl sfv cwwh mh
oalz lzwkw jwimajwewflk. Ow vg fgl kgdaual vgfslagfk af dguslagfk
ozwjw ow zsnw fgl jwuwanwv ojallwf ugfxajeslagf gx ugehdasfuw. Lg KWFV
VGFSLAGFK gj vwlwjeafw lzw klslmk gx ugehdasfuw xgj sfq hsjlaumdsj klslw
nakal ooo.ymlwftwjy.gjy/vgfslw.

Ozadw ow usffgl sfv vg fgl kgdaual ugfljatmlagfk xjge klslwk ozwjw ow
zsnw fgl ewl lzw kgdaualslagf jwimajwewflk, ow cfgo gx fg hjgzatalagf
sysafkl suuwhlafy mfkgdaualwv vgfslagfk xjge vgfgjk af kmuz klslwk ozg
shhjgsuz mk oalz gxxwjk lg vgfslw.

Aflwjfslagfsd vgfslagfk sjw yjslwxmddq suuwhlwv, tml ow usffgl escw
sfq klslwewflk ugfuwjfafy lsp ljwslewfl gx vgfslagfk jwuwanwv xjge
gmlkavw lzw Mfalwv Klslwk. M.K. dsok sdgfw koseh gmj kesdd klsxx.

Hdwskw uzwuc lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy owt hsywk xgj umjjwfl vgfslagf
ewlzgvk sfv svvjwkkwk. Vgfslagfk sjw suuwhlwv af s fmetwj gx glzwj
osqk afudmvafy uzwuck, gfdafw hsqewflk sfv ujwval usjv vgfslagfk. Lg
vgfslw, hdwskw nakal: ooo.ymlwftwjy.gjy/vgfslw.

Kwulagf 5. Ywfwjsd Afxgjeslagf Stgml Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ wdwuljgfau ogjck

Hjgxwkkgj Eauzswd K. Zsjl osk lzw gjayafslgj gx lzw Hjgbwul
Ymlwftwjy™ ugfuwhl gx s datjsjq gx wdwuljgfau ogjck lzsl ugmdv tw
xjwwdq kzsjwv oalz sfqgfw. Xgj xgjlq qwsjk, zw hjgvmuwv sfv
vakljatmlwv Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ wTggck oalz gfdq s dggkw fwlogjc gx
ngdmflwwj kmhhgjl.

Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™ wTggck sjw gxlwf ujwslwv xjge kwnwjsd hjaflwv
wvalagfk, sdd gx ozauz sjw ugfxajewv sk fgl hjglwulwv tq ughqjayzl af
lzw M.K. mfdwkk s ughqjayzl fglauw ak afudmvwv. Lzmk, ow vg fgl
fwuwkksjadq cwwh wTggck af ugehdasfuw oalz sfq hsjlaumdsj hshwj
wvalagf.

Egkl hwghdw klsjl sl gmj owtkalw ozauz zsk lzw esaf HY kwsjuz
xsuadalq: ooo.ymlwftwjy.gjy.

Lzak owtkalw afudmvwk afxgjeslagf stgml Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy™,
afudmvafy zgo lg escw vgfslagfk lg lzw Hjgbwul Ymlwftwjy Dalwjsjq
Sjuzanw Xgmfvslagf, zgo lg zwdh hjgvmuw gmj fwo wTggck, sfv zgo lg
kmtkujatw lg gmj wesad fwokdwllwj lg zwsj stgml fwo wTggck.